




     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
                           MYDOS Version 4 User Guide
                                  Revision 4.50
                            for Atari Home Computers
     
     
             Copyright (C) 1988 by WORDMARK Systems and the authors:
     
                               Charles Marslett
                               2705 Pinewood Dr.
                               Garland, TX 75042
                                   CIS: 73317,3662
                                   UseNet: CHASM@KILLER.DALLAS.TX.US
     
                                        and
     
                               Robert Puff
                               Suite 222
                               2117 Buffalo Rd.
                               Rochester, NY 14624
                                   GEnie: BOB.PUFF
     
     
     
          This  software  may be freely used and distributed provided that
     this copyright notice is left intact, and provided that:
     
     (1) The source code in machine readable form is provided with
         any binary distribution, or made available at no additional cost
         to the recipients of the binary distribution.
     
     (2) A binary version of a derivative work may be sold for a
         reasonable distribution charge (less than $50), and the
         source code in machine readable format must be available.
     
     (3) A derivative work may not impose and restriction on the free
         distribution of the source code.












     MYDOS User Manual               page 1                   Version 4.50








                           MYDOS Version 4 User Guide
                        by Charles Marslett & Robert Puff
     
     
     I. INTRODUCTION
     
          The  disk  operating  system described in this manual is modeled
     after the ATARI (trademark of ATARI Corp.) disk operating system (DOS
     2),  and  may  be considered an extension of the very "user friendly"
     concepts  introduced  with  this operating system. The ATARI 810 disk
     drive  and  the ATARI 1050 disk drive are well supported by the DOS 2
     and  DOS  2.5,  but those DOSs have very limited provision for higher
     capacity  double  density  disks  (such  as  the  XF-551),  and large
     RAMdisks.
     
     
     II. SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
     
          MYDOS  4.50  is  intended to function as nearly as possible like
     ATARI  DOS  2.  This  means it occupies as little memory as possible,
     supports  all  the system calls supported by DOS 2, and in most cases
     uses  exactly  the  same  parameters  to the system calls. This means
     compatibility,  yet  MYDOS  goes  far  beyond  this.  On  a  standard
     single-sided, single density disk, MYDOS will read and write to a DOS
     2.0 or 2.5 format, and vice versa. There are a few programs that will
     not  run under MYDOS because of one or both of the following reasons:
     direct  "illegal"  calls  into  the main DOS or FMS code, and relying
     upon exact directory data (i.e., 3 digit sector counts).
     
          MYDOS  will  run  on  any 8-bit Atari computer with at least one
     disk  drive (that is compatible with DOS 2). MYDOS 4.50 has full READ
     compatibility  with  the  DOS  2.5 format, but will only write to the
     first 720 sectors of the disk. (MYDOS has its own format for enhanced
     density  disks  that allow full access.) It is not compatible at this
     time with the OS/A+ version 4 format, or the SpartaDOS format.
     
          Up  to eight disk drives (or nine if the ninth is a RAMdisk) may
     be  accessed,  but  only  one  is  required. The resident part of the
     operating  system  (DOS.SYS) supports all documented functions of the
     DOS 2 operating system, so MYDOS supports most available software for
     the ATARI home computers.
     
          The memory available to a program is affected only by the number
     of  files to be open concurrently: each disk file that may be open at
     the same time requires 256 bytes of buffer space. Unlike Atari DOS 2,
     memory  requirements  are independent of the number of disk drives or
     the  sector size and density. The need for a 256 byte buffer for each
     concurrently open file means that programs that keep large numbers of
     files  open will have less memory available than under DOS 2 and as a
     result some programs (mostly older versions of compilers and language
     interpreters)  will  not  have  enough memory to run. With three file
     buffers  (which  is the default) and no resident drivers (such as for
     RS232  support), MYDOS 4.50 permits binary programs to load as low as
     $1F00.



     MYDOS User Manual               page 2                   Version 4.50








     
          MYDOS  4.50  also  contains a very versatile RAMdisk driver than
     can  handle  upgrades  up to 1 megabyte that follow the guidelines of
     the  expanded  memory on the 130XE, or the Axlon upgrade for the 800.
     MYDOS  also  has  a  feature  that will determine how much memory you
     have,  and set itself up for your machine (For XE-compatible upgrades
     only) automatically.
     
     
     III. MENU FUNCTIONS
     
          The  menu provided by MYDOS 4.50 identifies 18 common tasks that
     might  need to be done. Rather than having to write a utility program
     (only  a few lines of BASIC would perform most of the menu functions)
     or  even  remember  the name and format of a DOS command, these tasks
     can  be  handled  by  entering a single letter. MYDOS responds with a
     question  asking  for  the details of the operation (which file, what
     density,  "are  you  sure?"  or whatever else it might need to know).
     After  you enter the remaining information, the function is performed
     and another prompt is displayed.
     
          You  should  notice  two  interesting things about the menu: the
     second  line  on the screen identifies the disk drives present on the
     system and what they appear to MYDOS to be (single or double density,
     RAMdisk  or  high  capacity  hard  disk). The next line describes the
     current  default  directory  (that  directory  used  when  a  disk is
     referenced  by  "D:"  (without  a  unit  number  after the "D" - this
     feature  will be described later). The second thing to notice is that
     after  commands  fill  the screen, the menu "rolls" off the top: some
     DOS  programs  (e.g. Atari DOS 2) keep the menu, MYDOS does not. This
     permits  more  information  to  be  displayed when a long sequence of
     commands are done, or when many files are copied. To restore the menu
     to  the  screen,  just  type  RETURN,  and the initial screen will be
     restored.
     
          If you wish to abort a command at any point, simply press BREAK.
     This  will  return  you to the prompt.  Pressing BREAK or RESET while
     writing  to  a  disk will not cause any damage; however, the file you
     were writing will probably not be displayed in the directory, and the
     free sector count may be incorrect.
     
          When  entering  a  filename, the drive number should be entered,
     followed  by  a  ":", and then the rest of the filename. If the drive
     number  and  ":"  are  not entered, the default drive (and directory)
     will  be  used.  In the [C]opy file option, entering the drive number
     only  will result in copying every file on the main directory of that
     drive.  A  drive  may be specified like this: "1", "1:", or "D1:". If
     you  wish  to  specify the file or set of files to be referenced, the
     drive  format  must include a ":" or it must be omitted entirely (for
     the  default drive and directory). Examples: D1:Test.obj, 1:TEST.ASM,
     or D2TEST (really D1:D2TEST) are valid file names, but d1:Test.obj or
     1TEST.ASM are not.
     
          The file name itself is either fully specified (referring to the



     MYDOS User Manual               page 3                   Version 4.50








     entire  name as it is on the disk) or includes "wild card" characters
     (specifying  a set of files). A fully specified file name consists of
     one  to eight characters followed by a period (".") and zero to three
     additional "extender" characters. The characters in the file name may
     be  upper or lower case letters, numbers, the underscore ("_") or the
     character "@". The only exception is the first character - it may not
     be  a  number.  The "wild card" characters are the characters "*" and
     "?":  the  character  "*"  or  the  sequence  ".*"  end  either the 8
     character  or  the  3  character field in the file name and match all
     possible  characters.  The character "?" matches only one single file
     name  character.  Examples: "*.BAS" will match every file ending with
     .BAS.  "TEST?.*"  will  match files TEST.BAS, TEST1.OBJ, but will not
     match TESTER.BAS.
     
          In  addition to the main directory (containing up to 64 files or
     directories),   each   MYDOS   disk   may   also  contain  additional
     subdirectories  of  64  files  each.  You may use one of two possible
     characters  to  separate  the subdirectory name(s): the ":" colon, or
     the  ">"  greater-than  sign.  If  the  main  directory contained the
     subdirectory  BAS and the file GRAPHIC1 were in the subdirectory file
     BAS,  it  could  be  referenced  with  the  filename BAS:GRAPHIC1 (or
     BAS>GRAPHIC1).  If  instead, GRAPHIC1 were in the subdirectory GR.dir
     which   in  turn  were  in  BAS,  then  the  reference  would  be  to
     BAS:GR.dir:GRAPHIC1 (and so on with as many names as needed). Because
     there  is  no  limit to the number of subdirectories on a disk (other
     than  the buffer size of programs using the directories and number of
     available  sectors  on  the  disk),  a  single  diskette  can contain
     hundreds  of files if necessary. Each subdirectory is a 8 sector file
     to  its  parent  directory.  Thus  it  is  limited  to  64  files  or
     subdirectories like the 8 sector root directory.
     
          If  a  disk  directory  includes  the  files TEST.ASM, TEST.OBJ,
     TEST.C,   TEST.ALM,   TEASET.DOC,   TRACE.FIL,   and   BETS.LST,  the
     specification  "t*.*" will not match any file name (since "t" and "T"
     are not the same letter to MYDOS). The specification "T**" will match
     all  but "BETS.LST" (since the others all begin with the letter "T").
     The  specification  "?E??.*"  will match the first four files and the
     last  one  (since  the 8 character part of the file name must have no
     more  than  4  characters  in  it and the second character must be an
     "E").  The specification "*.?" will match only the file TEST.C (since
     it  is  the only file name with a single character in the 3 character
     field).  The  specification "????E**" will match the files TEASET.DOC
     and  TRACE.FIL  and none of the others (since the 8 character part of
     the  file  name must have at least 5 characters and the fifth must be
     an  "E").  Note  that MYDOS does not always require the "." period to
     separate  the  extender  from  the  8  character filename.  Examples:
     FILENAME.EXT  could be entered as FILENAMEEXT; TES*.* could be TES**,
     but TEST.* could NOT be entered as TEST*.
     
     
     IV. THE MENU COMMANDS
     
     A. List a Directory or a Set of Files
     



     MYDOS User Manual               page 4                   Version 4.50








          The  "A" command will list the files on a disk with their sizes,
     followed by a line specifying the number of free sectors on the disk.
     If  the  line starts with a "*", the file has been locked and may not
     be modified or deleted without first being unlocked. A ":" before the
     file  name  marks  those  files  that are subdirectories. These files
     cannot  be  read  or  written  as  other  files  but only accessed as
     directories  or deleted (if the directory is empty). File lengths and
     the  number  of  free sectors are reported as 4 digit decimal numbers
     (most other Atari DOSs report the values as 3 digit numbers).
     
          If  the number of free sectors on a drive exceeds 9999, the free
     sector  line  will  contain  a  5  digit number, and be one character
     longer.  If a file is longer than 9999 sectors, the blank between the
     file  extender and its sector count will contain the most significant
     digit (the line size does NOT change).
     
          No  indication  is  made of the format of the file but ATARI DOS
     2.0,  2.5,  and  MYDOS  are  the  only  three supported file formats.
     SpartaDOS  or  OS/A+  Version  4 files must be converted to single or
     double  density  Atari  DOS  2 files first in order to be usable from
     MYDOS.  See  Section  6 for further directory information if you need
     more detail.
     
          The  "A"  command  will  list  the  directory information to the
     screen if only one file specification is entered. If two are entered,
     the second is taken as a destination file and will be overwritten (or
     appended  to  if  the  /A  flag is used) with the directory data. Use
     "2,D1:DIR.TXT"  to  save the directory data of drive 2 to a text file
     DIR.TXT  on drive 1. The entry "1,P:" will give you a printout of the
     directory of drive 1.
     
          To  list  the  files  in  a  subdirectory, enter the name of the
     directory  followed  by  a  ":"  colon  or ">" greater-than sign. For
     example,  "1:TEST:BAS:"  will  list the files in the subdirectory BAS
     which  in  turn  is in the subdirectory TEST in the main directory of
     the  diskette  in drive 1. Using "D1:TEST>BAS>" will achieve the same
     results.
     
     
     B. Run the Cartridge
     
          The "B" command returns control to the cartridge in the left (or
     only)  cartridge  slot.  If  no  cartridge  is  present,  an error is
     displayed,   and   nothing  happens.  No  additional  information  is
     required,  so  if a cartridge is present, it is entered after loading
     MEM.SAV (if enabled) or immediately.
     
     
     C. Copy a File or a Set of Files
     
          The  "C"  command  is  used  to make another copy of one or more
     files  of  data. The two file specifications asked for after entering
     the  "C"  identify  the source and the destination of the information
     being  copied.  Either  may  be fully specified disk file or a device



     MYDOS User Manual               page 5                   Version 4.50








     specification  (such as E:, P: or one of the RS232 ports R1: to R4:).
     The  destination  may  be a set of disk files (specified with "*" and
     "?"s) only if the source specifies a file name for the destination to
     use.  The source may be a set and the destination a single disk file,
     but  unless the "/A" modifier is specified to append each copied file
     to  the end of the previously copied files, only the last source file
     will remain on the destination disk.
     
          Note  that the "C" command always uses the full memory space for
     a copy operation (unlike ATARI DOS 2) and as a result, it will always
     invalidate  MEM.SAV  if  it  is  used.  Any pending program cannot be
     restarted after a "C" or "J" command.
     
          There  are several options when entering files to copy.  As with
     all  filename  inputs, the default drive and directory (whatever "D:"
     is  equal  to  on  the  top  status  line) will be used if Dn: is not
     specified.  Using "/Q" at the end of the line will query you for each
     source file it finds (useful for copying certain files but specifying
     *.*)  if  you  wish to copy it. Using "/S" will copy all files EXCEPT
     those  with the first letter of the extender being "S" (will omit all
     *.S??).  This  emulates DOS 2.0's [O] copy file option, and is useful
     when you want to copy all files except .SYS files. The last option is
     the  "/X" parameter. This will prompt you for disk swaps, even if the
     source  and destination drives are not the same number. Here are some
     examples of using the [C]opy file(s) command:
     
     "TEST.BAS"  will  copy  the  file  TEST.BAS on the default drive (and
     directory)  to  the  same  drive, but prompt you for the destination.
     (Same as the [O] command in DOS 2.0.)
     "D1:TE*.*,3"  will  copy  all  files on drive 1 starting with "TE" to
     drive 3.
     "D4:DIR>*.TXT,E:/Q" will copy all files in the DIR directory of drive
     4 ending with .TXT to the screen, but will query you before each one.
     "2:ADD,2:LIST/A"  will  append the data in the file ADD on drive 2 to
     the file LIST on drive 2.
     
     
     D. Delete a File or Set of Files
     
          The  "D"  command  will  remove  all  files  that match the file
     specification  entered,  asking  for  confirmation before each one is
     removed.  The  "Delete  file  xxx?" prompts may be disabled by adding
     "/N"  to  the  filename. In this case, all the matching files will be
     removed  "quietly",  and  the only further indication you will see is
     the prompt for the next command.
     
     
     E. Rename a File or Set of Files
     
          The  "E" command changes the name of the source file or files to
     match  the  specification  in  the  destination.  Unlike  other  file
     specifications,  the  destination  specification  MUST  consist  of a
     single  file  name: it must not contain any directory names or a disk
     drive  number.  For example, "D2:TEST>BASIC>NOTPNT.BAS,RANDIO.BAS" is



     MYDOS User Manual               page 6                   Version 4.50








     the  line  entered  to  change  the name of a file in the directories
     "D2:TEST>BASIC>".  To  change  the  name  of the directory "BASIC" to
     "ATBASIC", the line would look like "D2:TEST>BASIC,ATBASIC". One word
     of  caution:  Never rename more than one file to another name without
     wildcards  in  the destination. For example, renaming "*.*" to "TEST"
     would  rename  EVERY file to "TEST", making it impossible to retrieve
     files other than the first one!
     
     
     F. Lock a File or Set of Files
     
          The  "F" command limits access to the files identified. "Locked"
     files  may  not  be  deleted,  renamed, added to, or replaced without
     being  first  unlocked  with  the  "G"  command.  When a directory is
     listed, the files that have been locked will be marked with an "*" in
     the first column. The files that are locked may be read or loaded and
     executed  normally,  only  modification  or removal are prohibited. A
     locked  directory  cannot  be  deleted or renamed and no files may be
     written to it. The files already in it are not locked however.
     
          MYDOS  will  not  ask  you  for confirmation on each file, "Lock
     xxx?" unless you specify this feature by adding "/Q" to the filename.
     
     
     G. Unlock a File or Set of Files
     
          The  "G"  command removes the limitations imposed on a file when
     it  is  "locked" using the "F" command. It does not alter the file or
     otherwise  change  the  way  the  file  is accessed or used. The same
     function  may  be  performed in a program through the CIO function to
     "unlock" a file.
     
          As   with   the  "F"  function,  MYDOS  will  not  ask  you  for
     confirmation  with  each  file to unlock, unless you specify the "/Q"
     parameter after the filename.
     
     
     H. Write MYDOS to a Disk
     
          The  "H"  command is used to make a bootable copy of the current
     MYDOS  4.50  files  in memory. The two files created or rewritten are
     "DOS.SYS"  and  "DUP.SYS". "DOS.SYS" is the permanently resident file
     management  routine  accessed  through  CIO  and  the small interface
     package  that loads and saves MEM.SAV (an image of the part of memory
     used  to  hold the nonresident part (DUP.SYS) of MYDOS), and the code
     to load the menu portion of MYDOS  ("DUP.SYS"). The file "DUP.SYS" is
     a  standard  binary  load  file  containing the part of MYDOS that is
     overwritten  when  a  program is loaded into memory. Neither of these
     files  may  be  interchanged  with  any other version or type of disk
     operating  system;  both  should be treated as a single object. Never
     copy  only  DOS.SYS  or  only  DUP.SYS  to a disk without copying the
     other,  unless  you  will  never  access  the DUP.SYS menu (called by
     typing  "DOS"). The files written to the disk by the "H" command will
     reflect  the  configuration parameters currently in memory, which may



     MYDOS User Manual               page 7                   Version 4.50








     be  different  from  the ones active if the system were rebooted from
     the  master  disk  again. (See Section IV.O., configuring the system,
     for  the  definition  of the configuration parameters provided in the
     system and how to specify a modified configuration.)
     
     
     I. Initialize a Diskette
     
          The  "I"  command is used to "Format", or prepare a new disk for
     use with the MYDOS operating system, or to remove all the files on an
     old  disk.  The result of the "I" command is a completely empty disk.
     The  only  data  on  the diskette is that system provided information
     defining  the  space  available  and the empty main directory. If the
     drive  number  is followed by a "/N" parameter, the diskette will not
     be  reformatted,  but  just  "erased"  (the directory sectors will be
     rewritten).  If  a  disk  has  recently  been  formatted, this is the
     fastest way to remove all the files on a diskette, rather than to use
     the  "D" command. Use this option ONLY if you know the disk was good,
     for  this  does not verify the integrity of the disk. Due to a bug in
     some  hard  disk  interfaces,  this  "/N"  parameter may be needed to
     initially format the hard disk partitions.
     
          A  diskette  may  also  be  formatted in the Atari 1050 enhanced
     format  by  responding  to  the  question  "(Type  [A]  to  format in
     Enhanced)  Type  [Y]  to  format  drive x:" with a "A" (presuming the
     drive  is a 1050 drive or compatible with the 1050). The diskette is,
     however,  not  compatible with the diskettes similarly created by DOS
     2.5.  The MYDOS diskette will not be readable by DOS 2.5, but DOS 2.5
     enhanced disks can be fully read by MYDOS.
     
          An  additional note: it is a good idea to set the density of the
     drive  you  are  about  to format, unless the drive is not capable of
     double  density.  (see  the  "P"  command  for information on setting
     density.)  Otherwise,  MYDOS  will format the drive in the density of
     which it was last accessed.
     
     
     J. Duplicate a Diskette
     
          The  "J" command copies all the information from one diskette to
     another.  The  information  to  be copied form the source diskette is
     determined  by  specifying a starting and an ending sector number. If
     the  range is not stated, the sectors marked as in use in the DOS bit
     map  (on the VTOC sectors) are copied. The VTOC may be constructed by
     Atari  DOS  2, any version of MYDOS or any other compatible operating
     system.
     
          Specifying  a  sector  range  is  done  by  adding  two  numbers
     separated  by  a  dash  and enclosed in parentheses to the end of the
     drive  specification(s).  For  example, to copy sectors 19 through 54
     (tracks  1  through 3) from drive 1 to drive 3 without formatting the
     diskette  in  drive  3,  the command line could be "1,3/N(19-54)". To
     copy  the  entire  disk  from drive 1 to drive 2 after formatting the
     diskette  in  drive  2 the command could be "1,2(1-720)". This is the



     MYDOS User Manual               page 8                   Version 4.50








     proper  way  to duplicate a non-MYDOS compatible diskette (of course,
     copies  of  "copy  protected" disks will not normally be usable after
     copying  but  data  disks  for  some word processors and games can be
     backed  up this way). Enhanced density disks may be duplicated in the
     same manner: "1,2(1-1040)".
     
          If   the  destination  disk  is  already  a  properly  formatted
     diskette,  the "/N" modifier may be entered after either drive number
     to  skip  the  formatting  of  the  destination drive. Otherwise, the
     destination  diskette  will  be  formatted  before  the data from the
     source  is copied to it. That is, either "1/N,2" or "1,2/N" will copy
     from  drive  1  to  drive  2 without first formatting the diskette in
     drive 2.
     
          Note  that  the  "J" command, like that in ATARI DOS 2, will use
     all of available memory to duplicate the diskette: this means that if
     memory  has  been  saved using the MEM.SAV file, it will no longer be
     valid.  Any  pending  program  cannot be restarted after a "C" or "J"
     command.
     
     
     K. Save Memory to Disk
     
          The  "K"  command  builds a binary load file containing the data
     from  the  memory area specified, as well as adding an initialization
     and  a run vector address if specified. If the file is not to execute
     an  initialization routine on being loaded, the initialization vector
     should  be  omitted.  If  it  is  not to run on being loaded, the run
     vector  should also be omitted (trailing commas need not be entered).
     If  either  vector is entered as zero, that is equivalent to omitting
     it.  Note  that  the starting and ending addresses of the program and
     both  entry  points  are all specified as hex numbers. You may append
     data  to  another file by using the "/A" parameter.  This command may
     also be used for just adding a Run address to a binary file. Example:
     "D1:PROGRAM.OBJ/A,0,0,,4000"  would  add  the run address of $4000 to
     the program "PROGRAM.OBJ" on drive 1.
     
          If  MEM.SAV  is  active  when  the  "K"  command is entered, the
     MEM.SAV file is loaded before writing the file to the disk.
     
     
     L. Load Memory from a File/Disable MEM.SAV
     
          The "L" command takes a binary load file from the disk and loads
     it  into  memory.  The  load file's initialization routine(s) will be
     executed  and  the program started at its run address unless the "/N"
     parameter  is  added  to  the  file name. If the file is not a binary
     file, you will be returned with an "Error -- 180". A binary file that
     is corrupted will return an "Error -- 181".
     
          This  command  also  disables the MEM.SAV feature before loading
     and  executing  the program. To just disable MEM.SAV, press "L", then
     [RETURN].
     



     MYDOS User Manual               page 9                   Version 4.50








     
     M. Run at Address
     
          The  "M" command is used to enter a program loaded without a run
     address,  or  to  jump into any program without the need for a return
     address.  It  may  be  used  to  restart  the  computer  (loading the
     AUTORUN.SYS  file, if any, or a new DOS, etc...) by specifying "E477"
     as  the  jump  address.  If  MEM.SAV  is active (enabled with the "N"
     command  and  not since disabled by the "L" command), the contents of
     memory  will  be  restored from MEM.SAV before jumping to the address
     specified.
     
     
     N. Load MEM.SAV from a File/Enable MEM.SAV
     
          The "N" command takes a binary load file from the disk and loads
     it  into memory, just as does the "L" command. The difference is this
     command  enables  the MEM.SAV file before loading (and executing) the
     program;  and  when  control  is  returned  to MYDOS, the contents of
     memory will be saved back to MEM.SAV.
     
          To  just  enable  MEM.SAV,  first enter this DOS menu (by typing
     "DOS" in BASIC), then press "N" and [RETURN].
     
     
     O. System and Drive Configuration
     
          The "O" command is used to specify the type (at least logically)
     of  the  disk  drives  on  your  computer and is also used to specify
     several  system  configuration  parameters such as the number of file
     buffers  provided  or  whether  a  RAMdisk  is  present.  The  system
     configuration functions, which are not specific to individual drives,
     are  selected  by  pressing  [RETURN]  at the prompt "Drive number or
     RETURN:".  The  following  table  explains all the prompts for system
     configuration:
     
     
     Verify WRITEs?          N=do not write with verify, else do verify
     
     Number of File Buffers? The number of disk files that can be open
                             at once (RETURN = 3)
     
     RAM disk present?       N=no RAM disk on the system (skips the
                             next 4 questions as well), else the
                             RAMdisk is enabled, and the next questions
                             determine what kind it is.
     
     [A]xlon or [X]E type?   A=Axlon, (RETURN)=XL or XE type. If
                             Axlon, skip the next question.
     
     Use default config for (x)K? N=no, specify parameters. "Y" or
                             [RETURN] uses the parameters the DOS
                             generated for your type of machine. Note
                             that the "x" is replaced by the amount



     MYDOS User Manual               page 10                  Version 4.50








                             of total memory MYDOS thinks you have.
                             Skip the next three questions if answered
                             yes.
     
     Size(K)?                Size of the RAMdisk area in K (8 single
                             density sectors = 1K); this must be a
                             multiple of 16 (NI 256K upgrade=192 OR 128,
                             AXLON=112, default or 130XE=64).
     
     Control Address(HEX)?   Address of the memory map control port: a
                             RETURN specifies $D301 for the 130XE. For
                             the AXLON RAMPOWER 128, enter "CFFF" here.
     
     Page sequence?          [RETURN] if using a standard Atari 130XE
                             or equivalent RAMdisk. Other standard values
                             are (1) for the Newell industries upgrade,
                             (2) for the RAMBO from ICD, and (5) for
                             Axlon or compatible boards. The most
                             general response is to list the page
                             numbers to be used as 2 hex digits each,
                             separated by commas, and continuing if
                             necessary by ending the line with a comma.
                             The sequence is ended with a "0" if the
                             RAMdisk is 130XE compatible, and
                             with a "FF" if it is Axlon compatible.
     
     RAM disk drive no?      Drive number used to access the RAMdisk
                             (RETURN for drive 9 or a drive number 1-9)
     
          A  [RETURN] does not retain the current value when responding to
     these  questions;  it  changes  the setting to a generally acceptable
     default.  Even  a  BREAK  or  RESET  will not leave the configuration
     unchanged.  If  the  configuration process is aborted for any reason,
     and  you wish to retain your old configuration, you should reboot the
     computer or properly complete the configuration before doing anything
     else.
     
          If  instead  of  a  [RETURN], a drive number had been specified,
     then  that drive would be reconfigured. The first question identifies
     whether  the  drive  is  to be included in system initialization (and
     thus be available for later use). If a non-existent disk is included,
     it does not cause any problems with the system: it simply causes that
     disk  to be examined each time the system is booted and reset (adding
     perhaps  a  second  to  the time it takes to boot MYDOS). If drive is
     excluded  from the system, no further questions are asked. Otherwise,
     the second question asks if the drive is configurable: that is, is it
     like  the  ATARI 810 drive (with a fixed configuration) or is it like
     the  PERCOM  or ATR8000 drives. If the disk is not configurable it is
     assumed   to  be  a  720  sector,  single  or  double  density  ATARI
     810/815/1050 disk drive.
     
          The third question is whether the drive is a high capacity drive
     (does  it  use the modified configuration for non-floppy disks). This
     is  for  hard  disks.  This  should be answered "N" if the drive is a



     MYDOS User Manual               page 11                  Version 4.50








     floppy disk drive, and "Y" if otherwise. If this question is answered
     "Y", the only remaining question is the size (in sectors, from 256 to
     65535)  of  the  drive.  Drives  up  to  16 million bytes (Megabytes)
     capacity  can  used  with  MYDOS,  and  larger  drives can usually be
     partitioned  to  appear as two or more drives of less than 16 million
     bytes  capacity.  See  your  hard disk manual for more information on
     this subject.
     
          Drives that have not been configured can still be accessed. This
     configuration  is necessary ONLY when formatting hard disks, and when
     using  PERCOM  or ATR8000 interfaces. Other than the above, the drive
     configuration is not necessary - MYDOS will figure out by itself what
     the disk is capable of by its format.
     
          If  the  first three answers are "N" (do not exclude the drive),
     "Y"  (it is configurable), and "N" (it is not a high capacity drive),
     the  configuration  is asked for: Is the drive double sided, how many
     tracks  are there on the each side of the disk, and at what speed can
     it  move the read/write head across the disk (what is its step rate).
     The  first question is answered with "Y" or "N" ("Y" meaning "yes" it
     is a double sided drive, and diskettes formatted on it will be double
     sided).  The  second  question  is  answered  with  35, 40, 77, or 80
     followed  by  a  [RETURN].  If you have IBM PC/AT style high capacity
     disk  drives (1.2Mb capacity) you may use 77 of the 80 tracks in high
     capacity  mode  providing  1  Mb  capacity by selecting 77 tracks. No
     other  numbers  are  accepted.  The answer to this question specifies
     both  the type of drive (8 inch/high capacity 5 1/4 inch, or standard
     5  1/4 inch) as well as the number of tracks per side. This answer is
     very important to the operation of the drive.
     
          The  last  answer  ("Step  Rate?") is entered as a code: use the
     following  table and the drive specifications to determine the proper
     value:
     
       Code value    8 inch rate     5 1/4 inch rate
           0         3 ms/track      6 ms/track    (XF-551)
           1         6 ms/track      12 ms/track
           2         10 ms/track     20 ms/track
           3         15 ms/track     30 ms/track
     
     
     P. Diskette Density Selection
     
          The  density  used  for most MYDOS commands is determined by the
     data  written  on  the diskette and the operator need not worry about
     setting  it. The "P" command is provided to allow forcing the density
     setting  for  the  format  ("I")  command,  and to permit setting the
     density  for  disk  drives  and  systems  that  do  not automatically
     recognize  the  density  of  a  diskette  when  reading sector 1 (for
     example, Indus GT drives).
     
          Type the drive number, followed by "S" or "D" to set the density
     of the drive. Example: "2,D".
     



     MYDOS User Manual               page 12                  Version 4.50








     
     Q. Create Subdirectories
     
          When  a  diskette  is formatted, an empty directory (the highest
     level  or  root  directory)  is created. This directory is capable of
     holding   up   to  64  files  or  other  directories.  If  additional
     directories  are  installed in this directory, each of the additional
     directories  can  contain  up  to 64 files as well. A subdirectory is
     installed  in  an  existing  directory  using  the  "Q"  command  and
     responding  with  the  filename of the new directory. For example, if
     "TEST"  and "BAS" are two subdirectories in the root directory of the
     diskette in drive 1, "1:TEST:COMM" or "1:BAS>COMM" would create a new
     directory   in   the   "TEST"   or  "BAS"  directories  respectively.
     "1:NEW:COMM"  would  not  create  a  directory,  however,  since  the
     directory  "NEW"  does  not  already  exist.  A  "Q" command with the
     response  "1:NEW"  would create it, however, and a second "Q" command
     with  the  response  "1:NEW:COMM" would then create the new directory
     called "COMM" within the directory "NEW".
     
          Each  directory  takes  up 8 sectors, and after it is created it
     may  only be referenced as a directory (followed by a ":" or ">"), or
     deleted. It may only be deleted if it is empty (if it has no files in
     it). A directory may be emptied by using the "D" (delete) command and
     specifying  the files "*.*" or "*.*/N" to remove all the files in the
     directory. You can most safely do this by specifying the full name of
     the  directory:  D5:MSGBASE>SEPT1983>*.*/N for example. Now to delete
     the  SEPT1983 subdirectory, simply delete "D5:MSGBASE>SEPT1983" (note
     no trailing ":" or ">").
     
     
     R. Set the Default Directory
     
          The  "R" command is used to select a directory to be used when a
     file is referenced without the drive number: that is, when file names
     such  as "TEST1.BAS" or "D:NEWCODE" or even ":BIGFILE" are used, they
     are  assumed to be in the default directory. Programs run under MYDOS
     can  access  the contents of the current default directory by using a
     file  name  of  the  form "D:..." without the drive number explicitly
     entered.  They  may also set the default directory by calling the CIO
     Function code 41 (set directory) routine.
     
          The  directory  is  set  by  inserting  the  diskette  with that
     directory  on  it into the desired drive, then entering the file name
     of the directory with no trailing ":" or ">".
     
          If the diskette in the drive containing the default directory is
     replaced,  or  if the default directory on a diskette is deleted, the
     default  should  be  redefined.  The  one exception is if the default
     directory  is  the  root  or  main  directory  on a diskette: this is
     because the root directory is at the same location on all diskettes.
     
     
     V. FILE MANAGER FUNCTIONS PROVIDED THROUGH CIO
     



     MYDOS User Manual               page 13                  Version 4.50








          This  part  of  the  documentation  is included in the technical
     notes of MYDOS, so consult those notes for details.
     
     
     VI. CIO FUNCTION CODES PROVIDED BY MYDOS 4.50
     
          This  part  of  the  documentation  is included in the technical
     notes of MYDOS, so consult those notes for details.
     
     
     VIII. MYDOS MEMORY MAP
     
          This  part  of  the  documentation  is included in the technical
     notes of MYDOS, so consult those notes for details.
     
     
     IX. CUSTOMIZING A SYSTEM DISK
     
     
          Much of this section is covered in the technical notes, but here
     are some things pertinent to all users.
     
     
     RAMdisk Configurations
     
          The  RAMdisk  driver  included  in MYDOS 4.50 will automatically
     configure  itself  on  XE compatible memory upgrades. It is suggested
     you use this feature. If you REALLY want to set up the system to your
     specifications  (such as configuring it to NOT use the banks BASIC XE
     uses),   the  power  is  available.  This  is  necessary  when  AXLON
     compatible  upgrades  for the 800. The default page sequence uses the
     standard XE banks first.
     
          The  file  RAMBOOT.M65, the MAC/65 assembler source code for the
     file RAMBOOT.AUT, is an AUTORUN.SYS file that simulates the operation
     of  Atari  DOS  2.5 and its RAMdisk handler. It "formats" the RAMdisk
     and  copies DUP.SYS to it, as well as setting the RAMdisk unit number
     and the unit used to access the DUP.SYS and MEM.SAV files to 8.
     
          By modifying the code in the source file and creating a modified
     AUTORUN.SYS  file,  the  drive used to save MEM.SAV and fetch DUP.SYS
     can  be  modified, other files than just DUP.SYS can be copied to the
     RAMdisk  when  the  system is booted, or any other operation could be
     performed that you find useful.
     
     
     Number of Files Open at Once
     
          The  number of files that may be simultaneously open is set with
     the  same byte as in ATARI DOS 2: location $0709 (decimal 1801). This
     byte  contains a number from 1 to 16 setting the number of disk files
     that  may  be  open  at  the  same time. Normally it is set to 3, the
     smallest  number  that  supports all the functions in the MYDOS menu.
     Specifically,  a  copy  from  one disk file to another requires three



     MYDOS User Manual               page 14                  Version 4.50








     open  disk  files. The value in the distributed version of MYDOS 4.50
     is three; to permit more or fewer files, use the "O" command followed
     by  a  RETURN. To permanently change the maximum number of files, use
     the "H" command to write a modified MYDOS system to a disk. Each file
     that  may  be  open at one time requires the allocation of a 256 byte
     buffer, so setting this value to 7 (instead of 3) will cause MYDOS to
     be  1024 bytes longer than before, and the programs loaded must begin
     no  lower than $22E9 (instead of $1EE9). In corresponding fashion, by
     setting the value to 1, a BBS program can be loaded in with 512 bytes
     of  additional  memory if only one disk file is ever open at one time
     (commonly true of bulletin board programs).
     
     
     Controlling the Disk Drives Accessed by MYDOS
     
          Like ATARI DOS 2, MYDOS automatically identifies the disk drives
     that  are  present  when  booted  up  initially  and  any  time it is
     reinitialized  (some programs do this on exiting to the DOS and it is
     always  done  if the RESET key is pressed). MYDOS 4.50 is distributed
     with  drives  1  and 2 configured, all others are omitted in order to
     speed  up  the  booting  process. To modify the maximum configuration
     MYDOS  will use, invoke the "O" command for each drive to be added to
     (or  removed  from)  the system. Pressing the RESET key will then use
     this  value  to redefine the drive. To permanently change the maximum
     drive  configuration,  use the "H" command to write out a new copy of
     MYDOS back to your system disk.
     
     
     Selecting or Disabling Write-with-Verify
     
          MYDOS  4.50 is distributed with the verify disabled, to speed up
     writing. Most drives (and disks) are very reliable, and function with
     no  problems  with  the  verify  disabled. However, if you experience
     problems, or want to be 100% sure your data written will be good, use
     the  "V"  command  to  enable  verify.  As  with DOS 2.0, the byte at
     location  $0779  (1913  decimal) controls all write operations to the
     disk.  If  the  value  "poked"  into it is $57 (87 decimal), then all
     writes  will be read back to verify the action was successful. If the
     value  "poked"  into  $0779  is  $50 (80 decimal) then writes will be
     assumed successful, and will be performed in about one third the time
     taken  when verify is enabled. Note that this address is not the same
     as  in  MYDOS  4.0  and  4.1 (where it was $0770 or 1904 decimal). To
     permanently  alter the DOS, rewrite it back to the disk using the "H"
     command after changing it.
     
     
     X. DISK DRIVE INTERFACE (via SIO)
     
          This information is covered in the technical notes for MYDOS.
     
     
     XI. RAMDISK INTERFACE
     
          This information is also covered in the technical notes.



     MYDOS User Manual               page 15                  Version 4.50








     
     
     XII. INITIAL INSTALLATION INSTRUCTIONS
     
          The  following  checklist  is a procedure to bring up MYDOS on a
     new  hardware  configuration.  It  should be done with an un-modified
     copy  of MYDOS 4.50, and care should be taken to perform the steps in
     exactly the order specified.
     
     HOW TO GET FROM THE DRIVEWAY TO THE FREEWAY:
     
       1. Before turning on your computer and disk drive, make sure that
          you do not have a cartridge installed in the computer.
       2. Turn on the disk drive, and when it stops spinning, insert the
          MYDOS master diskette. Close the door.
       3. Turn on the computer (with OPTION held if using an XL or XE
          computer). After several seconds, the MYDOS menu should appear
          on the screen. A prompt "Select Item (RETURN for menu):" will
          be displayed.
       4. If you have a standard 2-drive system with single sided 40
          track drives and either no RAMdisk or the standard Atari
          130XE memory configuration, continue with step "6".
       5. Configure each of your disk drives only if they are hard
          disks or special double-sided (XF-551) or more than 40
          tracks by entering the "O" command followed by the drive
          number, and answering the questions the program asks you.
       6. If you need to run a program that requires more than 3 disk
          files active at a time or you otherwise want alter one of
          the default parameters, press the "O" key followed by the
          RETURN key and answer the system configuration questions.
          This is also where the RAMdisk configuration needs to be
          entered if it is not a standard 130XE RAMdisk. ****
       7. Now, insert a blank diskette in the disk drive and format it
          with the "I" command (remove the write protect tab if the
          diskette is write protected -- but first ask yourself why
          you put it there in the first place!). If an error message
          is displayed, insert another diskette; the first is bad.
       8. Write the system files DOS.SYS and DUP.SYS to the newly
          formatted diskette with the "H" command and skip to step
          "10" if you do not have an ATARI 130XE computer or some
          other RAMdisk usable with the MYDOS RAMdisk driver.
       9. If you have an ATARI 130XE computer or have another kind of
          RAMdisk and wish to use the MYDOS RAMdisk driver, copy
          RAMBOOT3.AUT on the master diskette to AUTORUN.SYS on the
          new diskette (use the "C" command, and if you have only one
          drive, enter the command line "RAMBOOT.AUT,AUTORUN.SYS/X"
          when MYDOS asks for the file names).**
      10. This is now your primary system backup disk: place a write
          protect tab on it, label it, and use the "J" command to
          make as many working boot disks as you need from it.
     
     
     NOTES:
     



     MYDOS User Manual               page 16                  Version 4.50








          The  RAMBOOT3  program will first format your RAMdisk, then copy
     the  files  in  a  directory  called RAMDISK on your boot disk to the
     RAMdisk  if  such  a  directory  exists.  To  take  advantage of this
     feature,  use  the  "Q"  command to create the directory and copy the
     files  you want on the RAMdisk to it. If you do not want your ramdisk
     formatted  each time you boot-up, which is not recommended, skip this
     step (step 9). Just be sure you format your ramdisk before using it.
     
     
      ** -- The source file for the RAM disk boot is also included; if
            you feel the urge, modify it to copy other files to the
     RAMdisk
            in addition to DUP.SYS (take out the MEM.SAV setting code,
            too, if you need the space) or perhaps add a call to change
            the default disk drive to D8:. Just remember that if you
            string together several autorun files, only the last will have
            its RUN address invoked.
     
     **** -- NEWELL INDUSTRIES 800XL UPGRADE -- this RAMdisk can use
            page sequence 0, page sequence 1, or the default. The
            E3/E7/EB/EF pages can be reserved for BASIC/XE in
            extended mode by setting the RAMdisk size to 128K and
            the sequence to 1. Enter Size=128 (or 192 if you will
            not be using BASIC/XE often), Control address=D301, and
            Page sequence=1. In the second case this will use the area
            also used by BASIC/XE, but it will access it only after
            the first 128K are used up. By setting the size to 128K,
            BASIC/XE and the RAMdisk are fully separate and cannot
            interfere with each other.
     
     **** -- AXLON RAMPOWER 128 for the Atari 800 computer -- MYDOS
            4.50 comes configured for the Atari 130XE -- if you are
            installing it on an 800 with an Axlon RAMPOWER board, you
            must disable the 128K mode on the RAMPOWER board until
            you have configured the MYDOS RAMdisk code by entering
            Size=112, Control address=CFFF and Page sequence=5. Then
            write the DOS back to a new diskette, copy AUTORUN.SYS
            to it, switch the RAMPOWER board back to 128K and boot
            up the new diskette.


















     MYDOS User Manual               page 17                  Version 4.50








     
     XIII. ERROR CODES AND THEIR SOURCES
     
       3   Last byte of file read, next read will return EOF (MYDOS)
     128   Break Abort (OS ROMs)
     129   IOCB already open (OS ROMs)
     130   No such device defined in the system (OS ROMs)
     131   Write-only IOCB, cannot read (OS ROMs)
     132   Invalid command (OS ROMs)
     133   Device or File not open (OS ROMs)
     134   Invalid IOCB reference (OS ROMs)
     135   Read-only IOCB, cannot write (OS ROMs)
     136   Attempt to read past end of file (MYDOS)
     137   Truncated record (OS ROMs)
     138   Device Timeout (OS ROMs)
     139   Device NAK (serial bus failure, OS ROMs)
     141   Cursor out of range for graphics mode (OS ROMs)
     142   Data frame overrun (serial bus failure, OS ROMs)
     143   Data frame checksum error (serial bus failure, OS ROMs)
     144   Device I/O error (in peripheral hardware, OS ROMs)
     146   Function not provided by handler (OS ROMs)
     147   Insufficient RAM for graphics mode selected (OS ROMs)
     160   Invalid Unit/Drive Number, zero or greater than 7 (both
           MYDOS and OS ROMs)
     161   No sector buffer available, too many open files (MYDOS)
     162   Disk full, cannot allocate space for output file (MYDOS)
     163*  Write protected or system error - disk is not readable (MYDOS)
     164   File number in link does not match the file's directory
           location (MYDOS)
     165   Invalid file name (MYDOS)
     166   Byte not within file, invalid POINT request (MYDOS)
     167   File locked, cannot be altered (MYDOS)
     168   Invalid IOCB (MYDOS and OS ROMs)
     169   Directory full, cannot create a 65-th entry in a directory
           -- entries may be used for "lost" as well as real files
           (MYDOS)
     170   File not in directory, cannot be opened for input (MYDOS)
     171   IOCB not open (MYDOS and OS ROMs)
     172*  File or directory of same name already exists in parent
           directory, cannot create (MYDOS)
     173   Bad diskette or drive, cannot format diskette (MYDOS)
     174*  Directory not in parent directory (MYDOS)
     175*  Directory not empty, cannot delete (MYDOS)
     180*  Not a binary file (MYDOS)
     181*  Invalid address range for binary file, END<BEGIN (MYDOS)
     
     * -- New error codes, not present or different in Atari DOS 2.
     
          Most  error codes are identical to those returned from ATARI DOS
     2;  the  differences  result from the expanded capabilities of MYDOS.
     Specifically,  Error  164,  indicating  a file number mis-match, only
     occurs  if  the  file is written in DOS 2.0 or DOS 2.5 format. Errors
     180  and  181 can only occur when XIO 39 (or 40) is invoked to load a
     file.  Errors  172 and 175 apply to creating and deleting directories



     MYDOS User Manual               page 18                  Version 4.50








     and  have  no  ATARI DOS 2 equivalent; error 174 applies to accessing
     files  in  subdirectories,  so it also has no ATARI DOS 2 equivalent.
     Error code 173 serves the same function as it did in ATARI DOS 2, but
     is returned more often (to identify bad diskettes more reliably).
     




















































     MYDOS User Manual               page 19                  Version 4.50



