     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
                         The Next Step -- by Mike Fitch
                         ------------------------------
     
          The mere fact that you have subscribed to this newsletter
     indicates that you have taken up the challenge to use your computer as
     more than a game machine.  What's more, you are more serious about it
     than most:  you laid out the extra cash to buy a programming language
     other than the one provided with your computer.  Just what you do with
     that language varies wildly, from collecting dust to writing
     commercial software, based on your inclination and perserverence.
     
          Most of you fall into the "programmer" category:  you write small
     programs for your own or your children's use, you explore the limits
     of your computer, and/or you type in programs you find in Atari
     magazines.  Don't get me wrong--this category is much better than the
     "game player" category.  The only thing against it is that it's
     stagnant;  once you have found all the "tricks" of whatever computer
     and language you're using, the programming isn't fun any more...it's a
     chore.
     
          When you get to this point, you have to make a choice:  give up
     programming altogether, or find some way to expand your programming
     skills.  You could try a new language or a new computer, but these
     novelties become boring quite quickly.  You might try to expand in a
     different direction, but what could that direction be?  The answer
     isn't obvious simply because you learned programming on Atari
     computers and from Atari-oriented articles, books, and magazines.
     Unfortunately, this "different direction" is almost unknown in the
     Atari world.
     
          The name of this unknown direction?  Design.  That's right,
     design...just like "artistic design" and "designer jeans", but just
     like "mechanical design" too.  A word like that -- one that has ties
     to the arts as well as to the sciences -- just has to have some
     interesting applications in the world of programming.
     
          Indeed it does; every program ever written has some design.  In
     fact, there are actually two types (or phases) of program design.  To
     make things easier, I'll use the terms "conceptual design" and
     "concrete design" to distinguish between these two types of design.
     
          Wait a minute...I just contradicted myself!  I said that "design"
     was unheard of in the Atari world, and then I said that every program
     had some design.  Which is the truth?  Both!  The loophole that gets
     me out of the jam is this:  although every program has some design,
     the design is not necessarily conscious.  The Atari world is a perfect
     example of this, so I'll use it as a example.
     
          To begin with, 99.9% of Atari programs are for the programmer's
     personal use.  This means that how well they look or work (i.e. their
     design) is unimportant; theirs is an ad hoc or off-the-cuff design
     that comes into being as the program is written.  The mere fact that
     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                               Page 1









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     they actually work is enough for the author.  The other .1% of Atari
     programs are commercial products or magazine software.  Unfortunately,
     a good 90% of these programs started out in the "personal use" group
     above, but became big enough or complex enough that someone thought
     that they could sell them.  The salesmen obviously didn't look at
     program design, they were too busy selling the product.  So what are
     we left with?  .01%.  In other words, only once in every 10,000 Atari
     programs did someone consciously consider the design of the program.
     No wonder Atari programmers have never heard of design!
     
          Now, back to design.  Before I get into techniques that will help
     you improve your design skills, I'd like to give meanings to the two
     types of design I mentioned above.
     
          Conceptual design is sometimes called the "artistic" part of
     program design, because it is the phase in which you let your
     imagination run wild.  As soon as you get a program idea, the
     conceptual design phase begins.  Some of the questions that come up in
     conceptual design are:
          
          What functions does this application require?
          What functions would make it exceptional?
          How should these functions be presented to the user?
     
     After brainstorming for a while, you usually end up with a "need"
     list, a "wish" list, and a bunch of pictures outlining the interface.
     Once you've gotten these items, it's time to get your head out of the
     clouds and work on the concrete design.
     
          In the concrete design phase you search for "algorithms" and
     "techniques" that will allow your conceptual design to become a
     reality.  "Algorithm" is a common term, but I'll give a definition
     anyway, just so we all understand how I use the word.  An algorithm is
     simply a list of steps that describe how to accomplish some task.
     Neither the steps nor the task itself are dependent upon a specific
     language or computer.  Some people don't add that second sentence, but
     I consider it very important.  Later you will see my reasoning, but
     for now let me simply say that I use "technique" to describe an
     algorithm that is required by or designed for a specific language or
     computer.
     
          The picture I've painted is very balanced and ordered:
     
     1.   You get a program idea
     2.   You brainstorm a conceptual design
     3.   You develop a concrete design from the conceptual design.
     4.   You write the program based on the concrete design's "map".
     
     Unfortunately, this order of events never really happens.  Why?
     Because steps 2 and 3, although separate in my description, are
     actually rolled together and interdependent.  What I mean by this is
     that certain concepts require certain algorithms, and certain
     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                               Page 2









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     alogorithms provide certain functions.  In the end, what you see above
     as a direct progression from step 2 to step 3 actually looks something
     like:
     
          2 3 2 3 2 3 3 2 2 3 2 3 2 3 2 3 2 3 2 3 3 2 3,
     
     except longer.
     
          So much for the "simple beauty" of design.  Now, let's look at
     some techniques that will help you recognize and improve you design
     skills.  Please don't take these techniques as gospel, since I'm only
     going to describe techniques that have helped me or friends of mine.
     
     Human Interface Design
     ----------------------
     
          I address this topic first because I feel that the human
     interface (or "user interface" if you desire) is the weakest part of
     almost every Atari program.  This topic is too big to cover here, but
     there is one book will get you thinking about human interface:
     Elements of Friendly Software Design, by Paul Heckel.  If nothing
     else, this book will make you feel better as a user.
     
     Design Theory
     -------------
     
          Whenever you take the notion to write a major program, you will
     most likely find that someone somewhere has already written such an
     program.  In fact, someone has probably written a book about it.  If,
     for example, you wanted to write a database, I am sure that you could
     find at least 20 books on database theory.  Even if you understand
     only 1% of what's said in these tomes, you will still know a little
     more about databases than when you started, and that "little more"
     might be enough to make you select a better design or choose a quicker
     algorithm.
     
          Keep in mind, however, that these books are not computer or
     language specific, even though they may use a certain language in
     their examples, or discuss the problems of each design theory with
     respect to real computers.
     
     Algorithms
     ----------
     
          There are lots of algorithm books available.  A good one is
     called Software Tools (it has various incarnations:  Software Tools in
     Pascal, Software Tools in C, etc.), but it's a bit dense.  For a less
     strenuous way to increase your general knowledge of algorithms,
     subscribe to BYTE magazine and/or Dr. Dobb's Journal of Software
     Tools.  These two generally have articles describing new (or improved)
     algorithms.
     
     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                               Page 3









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
          Really, the only trick to learning algorithms is to find some
     source that doesn't mix what I call "techniques" in with the real
     algorithms.  If you can't find that, look for some source that at
     least tells you which is which.  The result of not caring about this
     is tragic:  I know someone who translated an algorithm from BASIC into
     ACTION!, and kept several extraneous statements simply because they
     were in the BASIC code.  The book never mentioned that these
     statements were necessary only in Atari BASIC!
     
     Techniques
     ----------
     
          Almost every book for the Atari is a technique improver, but some
     are much better than others.  For the computer itself, I consider the
     following books indispensable aids in understanding, improving and/or
     developing techniques:
     
          Atari 400/800 Hardware Manual
          Atari 400/800 Technical Reference (including OS listing)
          De Re Atari
          Mapping the Atari
     
     What you should use to understand the language you use better depends
     entirely upon what's available for that language.  In most cases,
     examples from other programmers work best, but sometimes you can
     actually find a book the says stuff like "To recalibrate the frobisher
     in Martian BASIC, simply use the following piece of code (and notice
     our use of the XYZZY statement)".  These books can be a great help,
     but you may frequently find that they discuss every technique but the
     one you need to know about!
     
     
          My final hint?  It's very simple, but very difficult to fulfill:
     keep an open mind.  If someone tells you that she knows a better way,
     pay attention!  You may just find that she can solve a lot of those
     problems that you've been pushing to the back of your mind.
     
     
     













     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                               Page 4









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
                              General Information
                              -------------------
     
     
          We have some extra goodies available for Writer's Tool users:
     Print-to-disk and printer drivers for SG10, LQ800, and other printers.
     They are free, and they will be on our BBS.  Or Newsletter subscribers
     may have the files copied on their newsletter disk by sending it back
     to us.
     
          In looking over the contents of this quarter's newsletter, we
     find that we seem to have a preponderance of BASIC XL/XE material.
     There's a good reason for this:  we haven't received a lot of
     submissions in other categories.
     
          We already have some things in the works for the next newsletter
     that should make many more of you happy.  But remember, we DO want you
     to submit articles, hints, etc.  And we DO pay a nominal amount upon
     publication.
     
     
     
                          Tech Support Goes High-Tech
                          ---------------------------
     
          As most of you are aware, OSS is a small company that works hard
     to put out quality tools for the Atari community.  We try to do a lot
     with our limited staff.
     
          Fortunately, we enjoy a reputation for good support.  We do try
     to help customers with programming problems (even when the problems
     are not related to our products--so often true in the ST world!).  We
     don't always get updates out as quickly as we would like, but we try.
     And besides, keep reading.
     
          Unfortunately, one thing that eats up massive amounts of our time
     is the telephone.  When someone calls with a technical question,
     somebody on our staff loses more than just the time required to talk
     on the phone.  Just the process of interrupting a task often adds many
     minutes to our job, trying to remember where we left off, etc.
     
          The net result of all this is that we have decided to try to
     de-emphasize phone support.  It is much more efficient for us to
     receive messages on our bulletin board system and then answer a batch
     of questions all at once.  To this end, we are doing two things:
     
          (1) We are changing the hours of telephone-based technical
          support.  Free phone support will now be available only at these
          times:
                  MONDAY     1:00PM to 5:00PM
                  WEDNESDAY  1:00PM to 5:00PM
                  FRIDAY     1:00PM to 5:00PM
     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                               Page 5









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
          
          (2) We are completely overhauling the BBS.  We will probably
          install EXPRESS BBS (by Keith Ledbetter) as we believe it comes
          closest to meeting our unique needs.  In any case, the BBS will
          give us the ability to leave EMAIL for individual users so that
          we can distribute answers more efficiently that we do now.  Call
          408-446-3451 and watch us change.  But don't be surprised if it
          takes a while.  Sigh.
          
     We think that we will be better able to serve more people with these
     changes, and we certainly encourage you to become modem-active if you
     are not already.
     
     
     
                          Changes to the OSS User BBS
                          ---------------------------
     
          As a result of the new Technical Support policy, we have decided
     to make some massive changes to the OSS User BBS to make it easier for
     you to leave a question.  If you call the BBS number (408-446-3451)
     and nothing happens, don't fret.  The system isn't broken, it's just
     being worked on.  We will try to keep it up during peak hours, but
     there is still a chance that you'll catch us off-guard.
     
          When you do get through, please make sure that you give us enough
     information to solve the problem!  Make sure that you include the
     following:
          Your name, address, and phone number (voice, please),
          The model of your Atari,
          Any enhancements you've added to it,
          The product and version of that product,
          A quick description of the problem,
          The exact steps that produce the problem, and
          Patience.
     
     If the problem regards a specific program of yours, upload the program
     in its entirety.  The time it takes us to respond depends entirely
     upon the problem:  some have easy solutions while others are quite
     difficult.  Obviously, it behooves you to isolate the problem as much
     as possible -- a 10-line program that exhibits the problem is much
     easier to scrutinize that a 700-line one!
     
     
     







     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                               Page 6









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
                                Dare to be Bare!
                                ----------------
     
          You may recall our announcement of BareWare in the last
     newsletter.  As you may recall, we mentioned that we would be glad to
     review any of your software that you thought would fit the BareWare
     idea.  The response?  Zilch.  Does that mean that not a single one of
     you has ever written a useful program?  We don't believe that for a
     moment, so we think that modesty or fear of rejection must be holding
     you back.
     
          So, until some of you decide that your stuff is useful, BareWare
     products will remain restricted to stuff written by OSS associates and
     employees.
     
     
     
                     Shape Editor and Animator for ACTION!
                     -------------------------------------
     
          Are you tired of using monotone player missile graphics?  Don't
     you wish there was some way you could create multicolored shapes and
     them animate them without a lot of fuss?  Guess what...The Shape
     Editor and Animator (SEA) for ACTION! is the answer to your prayers.
     
          SEA lets you create up to eight views, or frames, of a single
     shape using a full-featured interactive editor.  Once you've made your
     shape(s), you INCLUDE it and the provided shape animation routines in
     your ACTION! program, and away you go!
     
     And, because SEA is BareWare, it costs you only $20!  To order, call
     us at (408)446-3099.
     
     
     
                     Graphics Utilities Library for ACTION!
                     --------------------------------------
     
          For years we've been touting the speed of ACTION! and extolling
     its fitness for graphics applications.  Now we're backing up our
     claims with hard evidence--a set of graphics routines written entirely
     in ACTION!.  With the Graphics Utilities Library (GUL) kyou can add
     those special touches to you ACTION! application without spending a
     lot of time developing your own graphics core.
     
          So just what does GUL provide?  If it's advanced text-plotting
     you want, GUL's got the answer: with its text handling routines you
     can personalize your text using a variety of mix-and-match options
     like bold, italic, lightened, artifacted, and even flipped!  If it's
     advanced graphics you want, GUL's got that too:  with its graphics
     routines you can access any graphics mode on any ACTION!-compatible
     machine (including text windows in the GTIA modes!), and then frame,
     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                               Page 7









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     paint, or invert various shapes at ACTION!'s lightning-fast speed.
     
     So just what does GUL cost?  That's the beauty of it; because GUL is
     BareWare, it costs you only $20!  To order GUL, call us at
     (408)446-3099.
     
     
     












































     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                               Page 8









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
            Autorunning ACTION! Programs without the Runtime Library
            --------------------------------------------------------
     
          As most of you ACTION! users know, DOS can load and execute
     compiled ACTION! programs.  If you compiled the program with the
     runtime library you don't even need to have the ACTION! cartridge in.
     If you didn't compile with the runtime library, you can still run
     compiled ACTION! code from DOS, provided that the cartridge is in and
     has been initialized.
     
          This initialization is done when you first enter the cartridge,
     but what if you want to run a compiled ACTION! program before then
     (for example, as an AUTORUN.SYS file)?  The answer is simple:  do
     ACTION!'s initialization yourself.  The piece of code below does just
     that!  Simply insert it at the beginning of your main routine and
     recompile the program.  Once you write out the new code (the "W"
     command in the monitor) you can use it as an AUTORUN.SYS file!
     
     Here's the code you add to your main routine:
          
          ;add these local variable declarations:
          BYTE errJmp = Error
          CARD opnBuf = $9B
          
          ;and then start your routine with this code:
          device = 0
          errJmp = $4C
          Error  = $B883 ;For ACTION! 3.6 only!
          opnBuf = $580
          Close(7)
          Open(7,"K:",4,0)
          ;now comes your "real" code
     
     P.S. - you might want to add a "Close(1)" after opening channel 7, as
     this closes the channel DOS used to load your code!
     
     
     














     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                               Page 9









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
                             Using Dpeek and Dpoke
                             ---------------------
     
          Any Atari magazine (Analog, Antic, etc.) you open will contain at
     least one type-in BASIC program.  After typing in the program I
     dutifully used the magazine's typo-checker to insure proper entry, and
     then tested the program.
     
          Like any good BASIC programmer, I wanted to know what made the
     program work.  Once I knew that I had typed in the program properly, I
     began to break it down into its components so that I could learn how
     it worked.  Unfortunately, these programs tended to have an amazing
     number of PEEKs and POKEs, and lots of bizarre math to make them even
     more confusing.  Then I discovered Dpeek and Dpoke.
     
          It only took me about a month to understand just what these two
     new commands did, but it was time well spent.  Now I can take those
     nightmarish PEEKs and POKEs in magazines and cut them down to size.
     My technique is simple:  find a pair of sequential PEEKs or POKEs and
     convert them to a Dpeek or a Dpoke.  Recognizing such a pair is easy
     once you know what to look for.
     
     Converting Two PEEKs to a Dpeek
     -------------------------------
     
     1.   Look for two sequential PEEKs of the form
               PEEK(A)+PEEK(A+1)*256
          where "A" is a variable or a number.  A common example is
               RAMTOP=PEEK(741)+PEEK(742)*256
     2.   Change the expression to
               Dpeek(A)
          Hence my example becomes
               Ramtop=Dpeek(741)
     
     Converting Two POKEs to a Dpoke
     -------------------------------
     
     1.   Look for two sequential POKEs of the form
               POKE A,V-(INT(V/256)*256):POKE A+1,INT(V/256)
          where "A" and "V" are variables or numbers.  Sometimes the math
          is done in different statements, as in this example:
               V1=INT(V/256)
               POKE 741,V-V1*256:POKE 742,V1
     2.   Replace the math and the two POKEs with
               Dpoke A,V
          Hence my example becomes
               Dpoke 741,V
     
     
          As you might have noticed, the giveaway that makes finding the
     proper PEEKs and POKEs easy is the use of the magic number 256.  99%
     of the time you find this number in PEEK or POKE math, you have found
     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 10









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     a Dpeek or Dpoke in disguise.  And believe me, revealing these
     disguised commands can make a magazine program lots easier to
     understand!
     
     
                          AUTORUN with BASIC XL or XE
                          ---------------------------
     
          There are many different programs floating around that are
     designed to produce an AUTORUN.SYS file for Atari BASIC programs.
     Generally, the idea behind this is to allow you, as the programmer, to
     create a "boot" disk that will automatically load and run a BASIC
     program when your machine is turned on.
     
          Some of these programs use "secret" locations with Atari BASIC in
     order to accomplish their missions.  Others "print" data to the screen
     and then put the screen editor into forced read mode (don't worry
     about what that means if you don't know).  Both of these methods may
     fail with BASIC XL and/or BASIC XE (though most versions of the screen
     read method should work with BASIC XE and newer BASIC XL cartridges).
     
          The best of these programs are the ones that do it "cleanly" and
     "legally."  The actually replace the "E:" driver temporarily and
     "feed" characters to BASIC until the appropriate commands, etc., have
     been given.  This implies that such an AUTORUN.SYS program could feed
     an entire string of BASIC commands to a program (e.g., to change
     graphics modes, put up a "Please Wait" message, and then load and run
     a program).  We suggest you find and use a program of this form, since
     it will work with almost any cartridge based product (including MAC/65
     but NOT ACTION).
     
          If you can't locate any better source of such an AUTORUN.SYS
     file, look no further than DOS 2.5 from Atari.  The program called
     "SETUP.COM" which is part of a normal DOS 2.5 master disk will create
     an AUTORUN.SYS file for you, giving you several options.  (You can
     even ask it to have the AUTORUN.SYS file set up the 850's "R:" driver
     for you.)  It does not allow an arbitrary set of commands to be
     passed, but it does allow you to choose the name of the BASIC program
     to run.  Try it; you may like it.  (Besides, we wrote it--in ACTION!
     of course.)
     
     
                              RunTime for BASIC XE
                              --------------------
     
          Many people have asked us about the possibility of a runtime
     version of BASIC XE, similar to the runtime version of BASIC XL that
     is found on the BASIC XL ToolKit.  Sorry, but it just can't be done.
     
          The BASIC XL runtime is 11K bytes.  Assuming little change in
     strategy, a BASIC XE runtime would be 21K bytes!  There is simply no
     room in memory for such an interpreter.  (See, there really IS a
     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 11









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     reason for our bank-selected cartridges.)
     
          If you would like to distribute and/or sell BASIC programs, we
     encourage you to investigate the BASIC XL runtime version on the
     ToolKit.  All you pay for is the ToolKit itself; there are no
     additional royalties, fees, etc.
     
     












































     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 12









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
                          "Skipping" Macros for MAC/65
                          ----------------------------
     
          In the course of your assembly language programming you have
     probably run into the following scenario at least once -- "Based on
     some test, I want to perform one of two small actions, but then
     continue with the same code."  In psuedo-code this looks like:
     
               CMP #Test  ;Make Test
               BEQ A2     ;Branch to action 2
          A1              ;Do action 1
               JMP CONT   ;Jump around action 2
          A2              ;Do action 2
          
          CONT            ;Continue combined code
     
          The jump (or branch, if you're lucky) around the alternate action
     is unsightly, time consuming, and a general pain.  Isn't there a way
     around it?  YES, but only under certain conditions.  If one of the
     "small actions" is a one- or two-byte instruction, you can make the
     other action skip over it without a jump or a branch.  For example,
     look at this code:
     
     1000       LDA SHORTEN    ;Shorten response?
     1010       BNE SHORT      ;Yes, set up length
     1020       LDA LENGTHS,X  ;No, get length
     1030       TAY
     1040       JMP CONT1      ;No branch: can't guarantee value
     1050 SHORT LDY #5         ;Use short length
     1060 CONT1 LDA (PTR),Y
     1070       ...
     
     One of the actions (line 1050) produces only two bytes of code, and
     yet we used three bytes (line 1040) just to jump around it!  What we
     need is to change line 1040 to
     
     1040       SKIP2
     
     where "SKIP2" is a macro that simply skips the next two bytes of code.
     Looking through our trusty 6502 instruction set, we find that "BIT
     absolute" operates on two bytes, and changes only the processor status
     flags.  Hence our "SKIP2" macro is:
     
          .MACRO SKIP2
          .BYTE $2C ;Op code for BIT absolute
          .ENDM
     
          How does this work?  Well, what is seen as "LDY #5" in line 1050
     of our source becomes the address used by the BIT absolute in our
     SKIP2 macro if the "long response" code (lines 1020-1040) gets
     executed.  This effectively "skips" the "LDY #5" instruction.
     
     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 13









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
          "But what about the status flags?"  Good question, because the
     BIT instruction, if executed, will alter the N, V, and Z flags.  This
     means that this skip technique can only be used in places where you
     aren't depending upon these flags.
     
          The SKIP1 macro uses this same principle, but uses the op code
     for "BIT Zero Page" ($24) instead of the BIT absolute.
     
     
     










































     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 14









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
                    Make Outlines with "The Writer's Tool"!
                    ---------------------------------------
     
          It seems almost impossible to get the indention right when you're
     creating an outline, because it's hard to keep indention in mind when
     you are busy deciding just what goes in the outline!  Dwight Collin of
     Pittsford, NY has a simple solution to this problem -- he used the
     "phrase buffer" capacity of the Writer's Tool to make "Phrase Files"
     for two standard types of outlines.  (If you've forgotten what phrase
     buffers are, or just need a refresher, please consult your WT manual
     before continuing.)
     
          Dwight's own words sum up his technique the best, so we'll quote
     his submission letter:  "My solution is to load phrase buffers at the
     beginning of the document -- phrase buffers that will automatically
     insert the correct indentation at the beginning of each section in the
     outline.  For example, if I am going to write a paragraph at the Roman
     Numeral I, II, III, etc. level (which is called 'level 1'), I simply
     press 'Option 1' and the spacing for the first line indent and the
     indentation for all following lines are set for that paragraph."
     
     Using the Outline Files
     ------------------------
     
          Dwight provides two different phrase files -- one for the
     standard "hanging outdent" style and one for the less common
     "paragraph indent" style.  (These files are named OUTLN1.PHR and
     OUTLN2.PHR on the newsletter disk.)
     
          To use one of these outline files, simply load it at the absolute
     beginning of your document.  This is easy if you are just beginning an
     outline:  load the outline file, move to the end of the text buffer,
     and start writing the outline.  When you want to save your outline,
     make sure you save it using a different file name; otherwise you will
     overwrite the outline phrase file!
     
          If you have already started an outline, don't despair!  Simply
     load the phrase file for the style you want to use, move to the end of
     the text buffer, and then return to the "DiskIO" menu.  Now load your
     outline.  Voila -- you now have the outline phrases at the beginning
     of your outline.
     
          Now you are ready to make use of the outline phrases.  Whenever
     you want to move to a different level in your outline, simply press
     the "Option" key and then the numeral which corresponds to the level
     you want.  For example, let's say that you are at the second level and
     want to go into the third level to add more detail.  Press "Option"
     and then "3" before starting the third level text, and the indention
     will be set up automatically!  This scheme works in reverse as well.
     To return to level 1 (from, say, level 4), simply press "Option" and
     then "1".
     
     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 15









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     
     


















































     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 16









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
                          Atari at CES:  New Computers
                          ----------------------------
     
          At CES (Jan 8-11 in Las Vegas) Atari announced several new
     computers.  Unfortunately, none of them are in the XE line.  (Don't
     fret -- the "Game Machines" article has some good news for you 8-bit
     programmers.)
     
     New St's
     --------
     
          As expected, three of the new arrivals are ST's, but with several
     news twists.  To begin with, the computer and keyboard are separate
     (with a phone jack connector ala IBM).  This has one distinct
     advantage:  when you spill coffee on the keyboard you won't fry the
     CPU.  The mouse and joystick ports are on the back of the keyboard
     (near the center for you lefties!), while the rest of the ports (DMA,
     floppy disk, MIDI, etc.) are on the back of the CPU box.  The CPU box
     is designed as a monitor stand, and has a built-in 3 1/2" drive.  If
     you think that all of the changes are cosmetic, you're wrong!  These
     new machines come with the blitter chip and use 1-Meg DRAMs.
     
          So what makes these new ST's different from each other?  Only one
     thing:  memory.  They come with 1, 2, or 4 Meg of memory.
     
     More ST Goodies
     ---------------
     
          As if this were not enough to spur ST sales, Atari showed their
     new 20-Meg hard disk (which just happens to sit nicely atop the new
     CPU boxes, adding only 1" to the stack height) and showed a 300
     dot-per-inch laser printer for under $1500.  Atari got the price on
     the printer so low by letting the ST run it, via the DMA port, thus
     cutting out the onboard CPU and memory normally required in a laser
     printer.  If third-party producers (like OSS) get hopping, you'll soon
     see a complete desktop publishing system for same price as Apple's
     LaserWriter.
     
     An Atari PC?
     ------------
     
          The shocker at CES was Atari's announcement of an IBM PC clone.
     That's right, we said "IBM PC clone".  And, true to Tramiel form, this
     clone offers more features for less money.  For those of you who know
     IBM jargon, some of the features are:
               8.0/4.77 MHz 8088 CPU (switch selectable)
               Socket for 8087 Coprocessor
               512K system RAM (expandable to 640K on motherboard)
               256K display RAM
               Built-in 5 1/4" DS/SD disk drive
               Built-in EGA, CGA, Hercules, and mono video
               Hi-res EGA monitor (720 x 348)
     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 17









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
               Mouse port and mouse
               Standard parallel and RS232C serial ports
               84 key PC/XT keyboard
     
     Want to guess at the price?  Would you believe $699.99?  We didn't,
     considering that most EGA monitors alone cost that much!  Just to add
     to the "sounds too good to be true" atmosphere, Atari says that you
     can hook a 3 1/2" ST drive to it and read (and write) disks from IBM
     laptop computers!  Just to set the hook, Atari also said that they
     would be producing an expansion box for it.  Even more unbelievable
     are the rumors that GEM and Microsoft Windows will be part of the
     final package.  Maybe it's finally time to buy that PC compatible
     you've always wanted.
     
     
     
                          Atari at CES:  Game Machines
                          ----------------------------
     
          Believe it or not, Atari is back into video games and game
     machines.  The 2600 is back, and, with the new packaging, who can
     resist its "under $50" retail price?  Its ability to keep the kids
     occupied is well worth that price.
     
          Atari also showed the elusive 7800 game machine.  Those hardcore
     Atari enthusiasts among you may remember that this machine was
     introduced just before the Tramiels' take-over.  Its graphics and
     sound are better than the XE's, and can use the "Supergame" cartridges
     from Broderbund, Electronic Arts, and the like.  It will sell for
     "under $90" and include the famous Pole Position from Atari.
     
          Now, the announcement you've been waiting for:  an XE game
     system.  Although it looks very different, it is actually a 65XE
     without the keyboard.  That means that you can write games for it
     (provided you don't require a keyboard).  This machine has the console
     keys, joystick ports, and an I/O connector (which means that
     disk-based games aren't out of the question).  Also included will be a
     gun, which makes us think that this machine is designed to compete
     with the Nintendo game system.  Unlike the Nintendo system, the XE
     system will convert into a "real" computer with the addition of a
     plug-in keyboard!
     
          It may seem that Atari is turning its back on its 6502 computers,
     but this new game system means that you still have a market, as long
     as you write games.
     
     
     




     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 18









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
                            An ACTION! Menu Manager
                            -----------------------
     
          On your newsletter disk you will find a file titled MENU.ACT.
     This file contains several support routines and one access routine,
     DoMenu.  So what is this useful for?  Well, it makes menus like those
     in this newsletter a piece of cake!  You simply provide the DoMenu
     routine with a menu title, subtitle, and a list of options, and the
     routine will display them, solicit a response, and return the index of
     that response.
     
     How it All Works
     ----------------
     
          Using DoMenu is quite simple:  pass it a title, subtitle, and
     options list (in that order), and it will return the number of the
     option the user selected (as a BYTE value).  Here's an example:
     
          PROC Main()
          
            BYTE choice
          
            BYTE ARRAY
              title(0)="Welcome to Greezle-Drab",
              prompt(0)="Would you like to"
          
            choice=DoMenu(title,prompt,Options)
            ...
     
     So far so good, but how do you get the menu options into "Options"?
     The answer itself is simple, "you compile them in", but the technique
     used to accomplish this is somewhat unusual.  Take this PROCedure as
     an example:
     
          PROC Chores()
          
            BYTE ARRAY
              s1(0)="Do Homework",
              s2(0)="Wash the car",
              s3(0)="Feed the dog",
              s4(0)="Empty the trash",
              s5(0)="Fix your bike",
              s6(0)="Mow the lawn"
          
            [ 6 $00
              s1 s2 s3 s4 s5 s6
            ]
          RETURN
     
          What does this strange looking procedure accomplish?  Each of the
     local variables (s1..s6) declares a fixed string (the '(0)' is
     required to insure that ACTION! treats the following '="string"'
     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 19









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     properly), and there's nothing too exciting or confusing about them.
     When we look at the code for the routine, however, our hearts quaiver
     -- it's obviously a code block, but what does it do?
     
          Believe it or not, this code block is a CARD ARRAY!  The 0th
     element of this array is '6 $00', which is the same as saying "the
     CARD, or two-byte, representation of the number six."  Elements 1
     through 6 are the addresses of the strings we just declared as local
     variables!  In essence, we have a String Array:  the 0th element tells
     us how many strings are in the array (6 in this case), and the
     following elements are the addresses of the strings themselves!
     
          This String Array disguised as a CARD ARRAY is exactly the sort
     of thing we want to pass as the "Options" parameter to DoMenu.  In
     fact, we could use our "PROC Chores()" pseudo-array as the options
     list in the first example simply by changing the DoMenu call to
     
            choice=DoMenu(title,prompt,Chores)
     
     That's right -- we simply use the name of our now familiar String
     Array PROC in our DoMenu call.  Now notice that all of the parameters
     in this DoMenu call are compiled directly into the program:  it didn't
     take a single execution-time statement to set up the data for the
     menu, and it only takes one to perform the menu.
     
     DoMenu Particulars
     ------------------
     
     Usage Example:
     
          index=DoMenu(title,subtitle,options)
     
     Parameters/Return Values:
     
          title  A string (BYTE ARRAY) denoting the title of the menu.
               This string is centered and printed on line 0.  If the value
               0 is used instead of a string, DoMenu will print no title.
          subtitle  A string (BYTE ARRAY) denoting the subtitle of the
               menu.  This string is centered and printed on line 2.  If
               the value 0 is used instead of a string, DoMenu will print
               no title.
          options  A CARD ARRAY that is interpreted as a String Array (i.e.
               element 0 denotes the number of strings, and elements 1
               through that number are the addresses of the strings) whose
               elements are the ordered options of the menu.
          index  A BYTE value RETURNed by DoMenu, corresponding to the
               index of the menu option chosen by the user.  If the user
               exited the menu by pressing ESCape rather than making a menu
               selection, the value returned is 0.
     
     Purpose/Usage Notes:
     
     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 20









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
          This routine puts a menu on the screen and then waits for and
          responds to the user's actions.  In putting up the menu, DoMenu
          follows these steps:
               Make a Graphics(0) call.
               Center and print the title (if any) on line 0.
               Center and print the subtitle (if any) on line 2.
               Determine whether the options should be single or double
               spaced.
               Center and print the options, keeping track of the longest
               one.
               Center and print the menu instructions.
          
          Once it has drawn the menu, DoMenu inverts the first option and
          then waits for the user.  The active keys and their effects are:
               Up        Moves bar up one option (with wraparound)
               Down      Moves bar down one option (with wraparound)
               Return    Exits menu, selecting the inverted option
               Escape    Exits menu without selecting an option
     
     
     































     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 21









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
                         Find and Replace with BASIC XL
                         ------------------------------
     
     
          Many of you have asked for the ability to search for a variable
     or string or whatever in your BASIC XL or BASIC XE program.  And, of
     course, most of you really need the ability to replace text, also.
     Well, the listing on this disk titled "FINDREP.LIS" is not a cure-all,
     but it should help in some situations.
     
          To use FINDREP, LOAD the program you want to work with first.
     Then use this command
             ENTER D:FINDREP
     (You did remember that you don't need quotes, didn't you?)  Next, type
     in:
             GOTO 32000
     
          FINDREP will prompt you for five pieces of information:
          
          SEARCH FOR::
               You should respond with the string of characters you want to
          find or change, followed by RETURN.
          
          CHANGE  TO::
               If you want to make a change, enter the new string of
          characters here, followed by RETURN.  If you only want to find a
          string, enter ESC-ESC here (that is, press the ESCape key twice,
          so that the little ESC character appears on the screen) followed
          by RETURN.
          
          QUERY EACH? 
               Proper answers are "Y" or "N" (without the quotes, of
          course), but you can enter the lower case and/or inverse video
          version of those characters.  Do NOT hit RETURN after this
          response.  (Note: You will not see this prompt if you are not
          making changes.)
          
          START LINE::
               Give the first line number at which to begin looking for the
          string.  Hitting just RETURN causes FINDREP to begin looking at
          the start of your program.
          
          END LINE::
               Give the last line number to use in the search.  Hitting
          just RETURN causes FINDREP to look to the end of your program.
          
          And that's about it!  It works.  And even though it is written in
     BASIC, it works reasonably fast.
     
     
                                     BUT...
                                     ------
     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 22









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     
          However, there are some things to be aware of when using FINDREP.
     
     1.   FINDREP uses line numbers from 32000 to 32046.  You can not use
     it if your program uses any of these same line numbers.  You can not
     use it to find or change anything in lines numbered 32000 or higher.
     
     2.   FINDREP uses BASIC XL's "LIST" command to do its work.  As you
     are no doubt aware, LIST normally displays a program in mixed upper
     and lower case.  We found it more convenient to use upper case only
     for this program, so FINDREP does a "SET 5,0" in line 32002.  If you
     prefer the mixed cases, remove or change this statement.
     
     3.   FINDREP uses up space in memory.  If your program is a large one,
     you may not be able to use FINDREP.
     
     4.   The biggest weakness of FINDREP is that, because it is written in
     BASIC, it uses up many of your variable slots (and remember that you
     are limited to 128, total).  Specifically, it uses 12 variables.  All
     start with the letter "Q" except for one called "PC".  If your program
     uses more than 116 different variables, you won't be able to use
     FINDREP.
     
     5.   In the same vein:  If you use FINDREP to change the name of a
     variable, you will end up with BOTH variables in your variable name
     table.  Again, the 128 maximum applies, so we recommend using FINDREP
     only with programs using no more than 100 to 110 different variables.
     
     6.   When you have finished making changes in your program, you CAN
     get rid of FINDREP by simply giving the command
            DELETE 32000,32046
     However, this will leave all of FINDREP's variables sitting around in
     your variable name table.  We suggest that you follow that DELETE with
     a command such as
            LIST "D:TEMP"
     (quotes ARE needed with LIST!) followed by another pair of commands
     (which must be on separate lines):
            NEW
            ENTER D:TEMP
     
          This will clean up your variable table and free up a little bit
     of memory, so it is a good idea in any case.
     
     7.   You CAN use this routine for some unusual purposes.  For example,
     you can duplicate a range of lines by changing the line numbers!
     
     
                                    BASIC XE
                                    --------
     
          You CAN use FINDREP with BASIC XE, but NOT when BASIC XE is in
     extended mode.  Sorry, but that's the limitation.  We are not sure
     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 23









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     that a version to work in extended mode is worthwhile, since a program
     big enough to need extending probably uses too many variables for
     FINDREP anyway.  However, if enough of you ask for it, we will attempt
     to modify FINDREP for extended BASIC XE in a future newsletter.
     
     
                                  How it Works
                                  ------------
     
          The principle behind FINDREP is actually pretty simple:
     
          1. We LIST a line to the screen.
          
          2. We used forced screen read mode to INPUT that line into a
          string variable.
          
          3. We look for your target string in the string variable and
          replace it, if necessary.  We build the replacement string in
          another variable.
          
          4. If we modified the line, we PRINT it on the screen and again
          use forced read mode to ENTER the line back into the program.
          
          Some of the programming "tricks" we used in FINDREP are worth
     studying, we think, so have fun!  Especially, you might be interested
     in our method of "blanking" the screen (lines 32034) and our use of
     the third parameter of the FIND function (lines 32020 and 32031).
     
     
     






















     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 24









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
                        Leases and Loans are Interesting
                        --------------------------------
     
     
     NOTE:  This program may be used with most fixed-rate loans and leases.
     It is not appropriate for use with variable interest rate loans.  It
     will calculate loan interest rates in the range 1% APR to 99% APR.
     
     
          The program accompanying this documentation seems especially
     timely.  Since the interest on an auto loan is no longer fully
     deductible on your income tax (and it will soon become completely
     non-deductible), many automobile dealers are really pushing leases as
     a good alternative.  Obviously, we don't know your particular tax
     situation, and we certainly would not want you to rely solely on a
     program we have supplied you for something vital like this, yet still
     you might find our program interesting.
     
          The file "LEASE.LIS" on this newsletter disk is a listed form of
     a BASIC XL/XE program that will calculate the interest rate of an
     automobile lease.  The most common form of an auto lease provides for
     all or most of the following:
     
          (1) A vehicle lease is "worth" a certain amount.  If you were to
          try to "pay off" the lease one minute after you signed on the
          dotted line, this is the amount you would have to pay.  (Although
          early pre-payment penalties might also be assessed; we ignore
          such penalties.)
          
          (2) The "worth" of the lease is usually based on the "retail"
          price of the auto minus any down payments, etc., that you might
          be required to make.  (Watch out, here!  It is strange how the
          "retail price" of a leased auto is often higher that the "retail
          price" of that same auto if it is sold for cash.  The mysteries
          of automobile shopping.)  In any case, we will call the "worth"
          the "capitalized value" of the lease.
          
          (3) You are generally required to make monthly payments of a
          certain amount over a certain period of time.  For comparison
          purposes, you should probably not consider that portion of the
          payment which goes towards sales tax, insurance, etc.
          (Exception:  If you want to compare lease terms versus--for
          example only--a bank loan, and if the bank loan will be used to
          finance sales tax and insurance, then you should include these
          amounts in your calculations on the lease, also.  This is an
          unusual situation, however.)
          
          (4) At the end of the lease, the auto is assumed to be worth
          something.  Depending on the terms of the lease, you may have to
          satisfy this "bring-back" value in one of several ways.  In some
          leases, so long as the vehicle is in good condition and so long
          as you have not exceeded a specified milage on the auto, then you
     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 25









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
          simply walk away from the car.  With other leases, the car is
          sold to the highest bidder (often the dealer himself!) and you
          owe the difference between the price paid and the bring-back
          value stated in the lease.  (In theory, the lessor could owe you.
          Any bets?)  Still other leases make similar provisions, except
          that you may pay the dealer the bring-back value and keep the
          car.  In specifying the "bring-back" value to this program, you
          may or may not want to use the official value in the lease
          agreement.  (For example, if you expect to drive many more miles
          than are called for in the lease, the auto's value at the end of
          the lease will almost certainly be less than that called for in
          the agreement.)
          
          As you can see, a lease is not always as simple and "clean" a
     deal as a loan is.  Still, you might be surprised at how good some
     lease terms and interest rates really are, once you start using our
     program to make comparisons.
     
     
                        Calculating Loan Interest Rates
                        -------------------------------
     
     
          Speaking of which.  One nice feature of this program is that it
     can be used for most fixed interest rate loans and leases!
     
          One thing that might be obvious immediately is that balloon
     payment loans (common in some parts of the country as "seconds" on
     houses and land) are essentially identical in structure to an auto
     lease!  If you think of the balloon payment at the end of the term as
     the "bring-back" value of that loan, then you can use this program for
     such loans.
     
          Not so obvious is that even a standard, fully-amortized loan
     (where the entire amount of the loan is repaid at the end of the term
     of the loan) can be calculated in the same way.  After all, who said
     that the "bring-back" value has to be greater than zero?!?  Simply
     enter zero (0) for the bring-back value and this program does it all
     for you.
     
     
                              It Goes Down Slowly
                              -------------------
     
     
          This simple program adds one other feature of interest:  the
     ability to display an amortization schedule for your lease or loan!
     In other words, you can see just how much of that auto or house you
     actually own after making 17 monthly payments.  (Shockingly little, in
     the case of a 30-year house loan!)
     
          Since this is a "self-help" disk, we will leave you a simple
     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 26









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     task.  If you would like the program to print the results of its
     calculations to a printer, then you need to make some modifications to
     it.  Generally, this is a simple matter of changing several PRINT
     statements to LPRINTs (in the last 25 lines or so).
     
     
                                If You Want More
                                ----------------
     
     
          This program does one and only one thing:  it calculates the
     interest rate of a fixed-rate loan or lease, given the starting and
     ending values of the loan/lease, the amount of the monthly payment,
     and the number of payments.  If we were to provide you with the
     "ultimate" program, it would handle variable rate loans, would allow
     you to calculate any one of the variables, etc.
     
          The only real toughie is a variable rate loan.  When a loan is
     tied to an index (e.g., the prime rate or the rate on U.S. Treasury
     certificates), the best anyone can do is try to predict what the
     interest rate in any given period will be.  In the past, we have
     written programs that allow you to make certain assumptions about such
     loans and which then attempt to guesstimate your overall interest rate
     and/or monthly payments.  If there is enough interest, we could
     publish such a program here, but we caution that using it is usually a
     trial and error procedure.
     
          On the other hand, the most common thing that most people want to
     know about a loan is "What will my payments be?"  For most fixed-rate
     loans, you already know the value of the loan (called "present value"
     in many circles), the interest rate, and the duration (number of
     payments) of the loan.  Given this wealth of information, the
     calculation of the payment is straightforward.  The mathematical
     formula is:
     
                         Value  *  I
          Payment = _______________________
                                     -N
                        1 - ( 1 + I )
          
     Where "I" is the "periodic interest rate" and "N" is the "number of
     periods."  Watch out:  "periodic interest rate" means, for example the
     MONTHLY rate if "N" is given as a number of months.  Further, "I" is
     NOT expressed as a percent, but as a fraction (that is, the percentage
     divided by 100).  All this is not really as bad as it sounds:  Most
     consumer loans are based on monthly payments and a given "APR" (Annual
     Percentage Rate), and in that case you can try this little program:
          
          10 Input "Value of loan ? ",Value
          20 Input "% APR of loan ? ",Apr
          30 Input "How many monthly payments ? ",N
          40 I=Apr/1200 : REM 12 months per year & convert from %
     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 27









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
          50 Payment=Value*I/(1-(1+I)^-N)
          60 Print Using "Monthly payment will be $$$,$$$.##",Payment
     
          BASIC XL and BASIC XE are especially well suited for quicky
     programs of this type.  Try them.  Try your hand at some simple math.
     You might be surprised at how easy it can be.
     
     
                       Commentary on the Program Listing
                       ---------------------------------
     
     
          This part is for those of you interested in the programming
     techniques we used.
     
          If you examine the formula for a loan payment used above, you may
     note that it the algebra to calculate "Value" given the other three
     numbers is trivial.
     
                                            -N
                               1 - ( 1 + I )
          Value = Payment * ___________________
                                     I
     
          On the other hand, you may have to work a while to figure out how
     to calculate "N" when it is the only unknown.
     
                   Log( 1 - Value*I/Payment )
          N = -  ______________________________
                         Log( 1 + I )
     
          And we won't even tease you:  You can NOT use algebra to find "I"
     when it is the only unknown.  The easiest way to solve for "I" is
     (what else!) with a computer by doing successive approximations.
     Thus, if you look in the listing, you will see a section of code
     headed by the REMark "FIND RATE BY TRIAL AND ERROR."
     
          Immediately after that remark is the line which starts off our
     trial and error solution.  We "assume" that the APR of the lease/loan
     is 50%.  This is a pretty ridiculous assumption (we hope!), but it
     doesn't really matter as we shall se.
     
          In the loop that follows, the assumed APR is used to test whether
     the conditions of the loan terms are fulfilled.  First, we pretend
     that the loan is actually a fixed-rate, fully amortized loan; and, by
     using our known payment, assumed interest rate, and value, we can
     calculate the number of months it will take to pay off the loan.
     
          If the number of months is less than the term of the lease, then
     obviously the assumed APR is too low, so we must increase it.
     
          When the number of months is greater than the term of the lease,
     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 28









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     we then find out what the balance on the loan will be at the
     expiration of the term.  This is done by finding an artificial value
     ("Temp") of an artificial loan that starts at the expiration of the
     real loan and runs to the end of the assumed, fully-amortized loan.
     
          If this balance is too high, then the APR is too high.  If it is
     too low, then the APR is too low.  In any case, we use the value of
     "Inc" to adjust our assumed "Apr" accordingly.
     
          We then decrease the value of "Inc" by half and do this entire
     process again, until the APR is close enough to actual for our
     purposes.  (Notice that we use the sign of "Inc" to control which
     direction we will adjust "Apr"--this is a cute trick, but it could
     have been done several other ways.)
     
          All fairly straightforward.  All fairly simple.  Once you
     understand the principles involved.  There are a couple of "PRINT"
     lines which have been turned into remarks in the listing.  You might
     wish to change them back to PRINTs to see the program in action.  It's
     almost fun.
     
     
     





























     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 29









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
                            Just Another Pretty Face
                            ------------------------
     
     
          The BASIC XL/XE program titled "FACES.LIS" on this disk was
     written to demonstrate several programming techniques.  It is NOT a
     "failsafe" program, and you should not expand on it without
     understanding it.
     
          There are only four players and four missiles in the Atari
     graphics hardware, and sometimes it is nice to have many more than
     that number of objects jumping around on the screen at the same time.
     ("Space Invaders" is the earliest example that comes to mind.)  How
     can we move several objects at once?  The answer comes from redefined
     characters.
     
          This program establishes a custom character set and then randomly
     places a particular group of characters on the screen.  By changing
     what characters are in that group, we thus animate the screen.  In and
     of itself, that is not very exciting.  It is pretty much equivalent to
     writing a program that looks like this:
     
          10 X=Random(0,39) : Y=Random(0,22)
          20 Position X,Y : Print "A";
          30 For I=1 To 200:Next I
          40 Position X,Y : Print "B";
          50 For I=1 To 200:Next I
          60 Position X,Y : Print "C";
          70 For I=1 To 200:Next I
          80 Position X,Y : Print "D";
          90 For I=1 To 200:Next I
          100 Position X,Y : Print "E";
          110 For I=1 To 200:Next I
          120 Position X,Y : Print "F";
          130 For I=1 To 200:Next I
          140 Goto 10
          
          Ah!  But suppose that instead of simply letters we were
     "printing" little pictures.  And further suppose that the little
     pictures showed some object moving.  (A little man jumping up and
     down?)  All of a sudden, we have animation!
     
          This program goes just a little ways beyond that.  First of all,
     it uses four characters to make one screen figure.  This way, we can
     get more detail.  Secondly, we make space for the screen figure to be
     three characters high.  This allows us to move the figure up and down
     through a larger part of the screen.
     
          Enough.  Let's go through the program by lines.
     
          1000-1040 You should know all this stuff.  If not, get "Mapping
     the Atari" or an equivalent book.
     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 30









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     
          1050 This is a bad place for a character set, in general.  We
     used it because it will work for our example.  Find a better way for
     you own programs, though.
     
          1060 A trick to quickly clear a chunk of memory.
     
          1100,1120 The variable "Ch$" is used to exhibit two of the neat
     features of BASIC XL/XE.  First, you can READ from a DATA statement
     into any part of a string.  (Atari BASIC makes you use the entire
     string.)  Second, you can take the VALue of a hex number if it is
     preceded by a dollar sign!  (But BASIC XE user can use SET to get rid
     of this capability on those rare occasions when it would cause
     problems.  See your manual.)
     
          1110-1150 We are reading in four of the set of six basic
     redefined characters.  The other two characters in our basic set are
     all zero bits, so they were cleared properly in line 1060.
     
          1170-1190 Now we generate the other "positions" for our character
     in other groups of six redefined characters.  Notice that we are
     shifting our figure one line "down" in each group.
     
          1192-1194 If you look at the DATA (end of the program), you will
     notice that each hex digit is made up of only 1's and 4' or
     combinations thereof.  By doubling each value (as line 1193 does),
     each character in this final redefined group of six will consist of
     only 2's and 8's.  Don't know the significance of this?  Wait.
     
          1220-1280 To print a figure on the screen, we have to print a
     group of six characters in the following pattern:
           AD
           BE
           CF
     (This is a pattern, only.  This sequence is not actually used.)  So we
     set up a string array with nine possible character sequences.  We use
     control characters to move the cursor back and down rather than
     repositioning the cursor each time, since this means that all
     positioning is relative to the starting point of our pattern.
     
          1320 An easy way to check for the START button being pressed.
     
          1330 Don't forget the power of the RANDOM function!
     
          1340 We let the figures move either slowly or quickly.
     
          1350-1430 And this is about equivalent to the dumb little program
     we showed at the start of this discussion.  We are printing a pattern
     of six characters instead of a single character, but the principle is
     the same.
     
          1440 You have to see the display in color to appreciate what this
     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 31









     OSS Newsletter                                             Winter 1987
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     (along with line 1192 to 1194) are doing.  We are demonstrating a
     "feature" of color TV known as "artifacts."  We really are sending a
     pattern of "white" dots to the screen, and if you have a black and
     white monitor or a very good color monitor (e.g., Commodore 1702, with
     separate chroma and luminance inputs from your computer), that is what
     you will see.
     
     However, on an ordinary TV, the dots are so short that they appear as
     colors.  Where in a byte the dot appears determines what color it will
     show as.  The 4's and 1's are purple.  The 8's and 2's are green.
     (See "Mario Brothers" for a commercial program that uses this to
     advantage.  Notice how the turtles, etc., are always purple, green, or
     white.)
     
          And that's about it.  This is a dumb example program, but maybe
     it gave you some programming ideas.  There are other ways to animate
     selected characters, such as changing the contents of the character
     set (rather than the actual characters on the screen).  All methods
     have their advantages; all have disadvantages.  Let us know what you
     have discovered.
     
     
     





























     
     Volume 1, Issue 2                                              Page 32









