     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     
                     Where the New Software Will Come From
                         An Editorial by David Plotkin
                     -------------------------------------
     
          It has become increasingly obvious that the production of new,
     useful software for the 8-bit Atari computers has slowed to a trickle,
     if not ceased altogether.  By useful, I mean utility and productivity
     programs such as spreadsheets, databases, and other such programs
     which enable you to do substantive work on your Atari.  This category
     does NOT include games, production of which has also slowed, although
     some new ones continue to be announced.  This editorial will attempt
     to analyze why the software flow for the Atari home computers has
     reached the current state, and where any new software is going to have
     to come from.
     
          The question of availability of new software is an important one.
     Sales of software tend to drive sales of hardware (computers), and so
     an important measure of the viability of a home or business computer
     is the flow of software.  The classic example of this is the case of
     the Apple II and Visicalc.  As the story goes, people actually went
     out and bought Apples (which, remember, sold for over $2500 in those
     days) to have the machine that the spreadsheet Visicalc ran on.  This
     maxim is still true today.  The Amiga computer from Commodore is
     probably the most technologicially advanced home computer available.
     Yet it languishes, and sales lag far behind the Atari ST and Apple
     MacIntosh.  Reasons for this have been proposed in the literature
     which supports Commodore machines:  the machine is too expensive, or
     it is marketed poorly.  These are contributing factors, no doubt.  But
     I think there are a lot of people who would willingly pay the high
     price of the Amiga if there was something they could do with it.  The
     real problem is that there is no software, and this situation doesn't
     appear ready to change in the near future.  So software is the driving
     force behind computer sales--as you have heard, without software,
     computers are just doorstops.  Now, there is a lot of software
     available for the Atari.  However, very little of it fits our
     definition of "useful".  Also, human beings like new things--witness
     the popularity of Christmas.  It is very depressing to search the
     catalogs and shelves of the software stores for a new piece of
     software to take home and play with.  As the months (and years) go by
     with little new software, owners have the tendency to give up and
     maybe even move to another machine which has a more active software
     producing community.  At the very least, they may stop using their
     Atari regularly.
     
          So--there is not very much "useful" software available for your
     Atari, and little likelihood for the production of more.  In contrast,
     the Apple II has a multitude of productivity programs, and new
     programs are constantly being announced.  Yet, to hear tell, the Atari
     is a more advanced computer, possessing more sophisticated sound and
     graphics.  Why the difference?  Part of the answer has to do with
     history.  The Apple computer was available about one and a half years
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                               Page 1









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     before the Atari, and had a sizeable installed base when the Atari
     first appeared on the market.  Despite the fact that it was VERY
     expensive, it was virtually the "only game in town".  Software
     developers, encouraged actively by Apple, began writing programs quite
     early on.  The historical reputation of Atari as the manufacturer of
     the 2600 game machine also hurt.  I would guess that every Atari owner
     at some time has had to explain that his or her cherished computer is
     "not a toy!".  Atari was the first of the computer makers to try
     mass-marketing techniques, making their computers available from
     places such as K-Mart and Toys-R-Us.  This alienated the computer
     stores, and also helped convince people that these computers were not
     to be taken seriously.  Game software prevailed, and the soft voices
     of the people who realized that their Ataris could also do "serious"
     work were lost in the roar of explosions and sound effects.
     
          Another part of the answer has to do with the technology.  The
     Atari does support more advanced sound and graphics--which
     unfortunately helps promote the image of it as a game machine.  But
     the Apple is an "open" system--that is, there is easy access to the
     system buss.  Even today, Atari computers have no way to add hardware
     "cards".  These cards can add a multitude of features that the basic
     system didn't have.  Need more sound?  Use a sound card, capable of 6
     voices in stereo.  Need more memory or 80 columns?  Buy a card and add
     it in.  You get the idea.  The Apple computers had 128K of memory and
     80 columns early on, and current cards can expand the Apple to 4
     megabytes.  Atari is just now beginning to catch up, with the
     announcement of additional memory and Atari's 80 column box.  Thus, in
     the features which are important to productive uses of a computer,
     Apple has an almost insurmountable lead.
     
          Finally, there is the question of the programming languages.
     Pascal, Fortran, a compiled Basic and C were available very early for
     Apple owners.  Atari owners had Basic A+ (now Basic XL and XE), but
     until the advent of ACTION, there was no fast, easy-to-use language
     for Atari programmers.  This explains in large part why the programs
     in the Atari public domain are almost all written in Basic, and a lot
     of them are pretty mediocre.
     
          Where, then, does this leave us?  We have the productivity series
     from Synapse (Syncalc, Synfile+, etc.) as the primary productivity
     tools for the Atari, as well as some packages from other companies,
     some good, some not so good.  Synapse is no more.  Broderbund,
     Synapse's parent company, does not appear to be actively supporting
     the series, even to correcting some of the nasty bugs which crept into
     the 130XE versions of the programs.  And don't hold your breath for
     Broderbund to upgrade the programs to 80 columns.  Most of the other
     major software houses, including some that have historically supported
     the Atari, seem to be also ignoring us.
     
          So far, I seem to be painting a pretty grim picture.  Let me put
     this in perspective.  What I am saying is that there ARE programs for
     doing useful work on your Atari available.  Many are quite powerful,
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                               Page 2









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     and some are very cheap--even to the cover price of a magazine and a
     few hours of typing.  But I doubt that many of the older commercial
     programs will be updated for the new features of the Atari computers,
     and I also doubt that much effort will be put into publishing new
     programs.  There ARE exceptions.  XLENT Software has their line of
     printer utilities, and just produced a new word processor.  Its claim
     to fame is the ability to include "Typesetter" graphics in the text
     and use multiple fonts.  Batteries Included has consistently been
     updating "Paper Clip", which is the word processor I happen to be
     using for this article.  And, of course, OSS has BASIC XE.
     
          The most promising source of the new software necessary to keep
     the 8-bit Atari line alive is the users themselves.  Very early on,
     Atari made an effort (APX: Atari Program Exchange) to market
     user-written software at good prices.  Chris Crawford's classic,
     "Eastern Front", was first published this way, along with a multitude
     of other games and utilities, including the C programming language and
     a two-drive version of Pascal.  I still use Sheldon Leemon's Instedit,
     a character set editor, and play "Caverns of Mars" on occasion.  APX
     did encourage programmers to get working and made these programs
     available for very little money.  But APX was a victim of the Atari
     upheaval, and is no more.  ANTIC Magazine now publishes a catalog of
     some of the old APX line, and includes some new material as well.
     Unfortunately, the prices have gone up, and the standards for
     acceptance of programs are very stiff.  Provided a suitable way to
     distribute programs can be found, however, the users are still the
     best source of new software.  This is especially true of the people
     reading this editorial--the customers of OSS.  You are the people who
     take programming seriously.  You must:  you laid out quite a lot of
     your hard-earned dollars to purchase OSS products.  In general, these
     products are programming languages.  MAC65 is quite likely the best
     assembler ever published for an eight-bit computer.  It is quite
     possible to produce very good software using BASIC XL, BASIC XE, and
     ACTION.  Many of you have seen my ACTION games in ANTIC and ANALOG,
     and my commercial "MINIATURE GOLF PLUS", available from XLENT
     Software, was written in BASIC XL!  With runtime packages available
     for both BASIC XL and ACTION, they are prime candidates for
     programming new software.
     
          The question then remains: if you have written a good utility or
     productivity program, how do you get it out there and maybe even make
     a little money from it?  OSS will be announcing the details of a new
     software line, entitled "BareWare" (racy, huh?).  Its primary purpose
     will be to make new software, primarily written by OSS customers,
     available to others at a reasonable price.  Look for the announcement
     in this newsletter.
     
          We have analyzed how the state of Atari software has gotten to
     where it is now, and looked at some hopes for the future.  I firmly
     believe that the majority of useful software will come from all of you
     out there.  You have the tools--the excellent programming languages
     and utilities from OSS (and others).  And OSS will provide the
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                               Page 3









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     distribution.  It is time for all of you (and me) to get busy and
     begin turning the software ideas that have been bouncing around our
     brains for a while into reality.  The Atari community is depending on
     us, and OSS can't do it all alone.
     















































     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                               Page 4









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     
                                 OSS has a BBS!
                                 --------------
     
          We were very surprised to discover that almost half of you have
     modems.  This fact pushed us into getting around to one of those items
     on the back burner: a Bulletin Board System (BBS).  Thanks to Clinton
     Parker and Mark Rose we now have a functional BBS.
     
          First of all, our BBS is private.  This means that you send
     messages and programs to us here at OSS, and not to other users.  We
     screen all incoming messages and programs, and will make anything of
     interest available to everyone else via either a system message or a
     download-able library file.  This restriction helps to keep gossips
     from hogging the BBS.
     
     Here's what the BBS lets you do:
          
     1.   Read system messages.  These messages give information on bugs,
          updates, and new releases, and answer commonly asked technical
          questions.
          
     2.   Download library files.  Our library contains both program and
          documentation files, organized by product.
          
     3.   Upload files.  You can upload files that you think are worthwhile
          enough to put in our library.  These programs must be public
          domain.  You might also want to upload programs with which you
          are having some problem so that we can inspect them.  These must
          be programs that relate to one of our products.
          
     4.   Leave messages for us.  If you think you've found a bug, or are
          having a problem with one of our products, or just want to give
          us a piece of your mind, leave us a message.  It's your dime (or
          dollar).
     
          The BBS phone number is (408) 446-3451, and is active 24 hours a
     day.  There is no password system, so getting on should not be a
     problem.  This BBS runs in ASCII (not ATASCII) mode, and supports
     XON/OFF and XMODEM protocols at both 300 and 1200 baud.  If you don't
     have access to a modem, or don't want to spend a fortune downloading,
     you can still get the BBS files from us.  Simply send us a check
     (outside US send postal money order) for $7.50 per disk (minimum of 2
     disks), and specify which disks you want on the order form.  Choices
     are:
          
          A1   (ACTION! #1)
          A2   (ACTION! #2)
          BXL  (BASIC XL)
          CDM  (C/65, DOS XL, and MAC/65)
          WT   (Writer's Tool).
     
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                               Page 5









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     
                           Technical Support from OSS
                           --------------------------
     
          For those of you who are new to OSS, you might be interested to
     know that we do offer full support.  If you have a problem using one
     of our products, simply give us a call or write us a letter.  Our
     technical support staff is on duty from 8:30 to 12:00 and 1:30 to 5:00
     (Pacific time), Monday through Thursday.  When calling, please be
     prepared to provide us with the following:
          
          The model of your Atari,
          Any enhancements you've added to it,
          The version of the product with which you're having problems,
          The exact steps that produce the problem, and
          Patience.
     
     If you write us, include all of the above, plus a disk containing an
     example of the problem and (if possible) a listing.
     
     If you want info about a product of ours that you might purchase, ask
     the receptionist for a product brochure.  If you have questions
     regarding our sales or update policies, ask to speak with the sales
     department.
     
     
                                 OSS Bug Sheets
                                 --------------
     
     So just what is a "bug sheet"?  It's simply a list of all the known
     bugs in a given product.  If you would like to get the bug sheet from
     us, please send us five domestic 22-cent stamps or $1 (per bug sheet),
     and we'll send you the list of known bugs and their fixes for the
     product you specify.  Simply print which bug sheet you want on the
     front of the envelope that contains the stamps or money.  We currently
     have the following bug sheets:
          
          ACTION!, PAD, ATK, RunTime Bug Sheet   DOS XL and OS/A+ Bug Sheet
          
          BASIC XL and BTK Bug Sheet             C/65 Bug Sheet            
          
          MAC/65, MTK, BUG/65, DDT Bug Sheet
          
     P.S. - These bug sheets are also in the BBS files library, and on our
     BBS (see BBS info).
     






     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                               Page 6









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     
                          Programming Contest Winners
                          ---------------------------
     
     [Editors Note:  In our last printed newsletter, we announced a
     programming contest.  Unfortunately, we never published a follow-up
     newsletter to announce the winners!  We hope that you will forgive us
     for the delay!]
     
     You surprised us again!  We expected that most of the 1K program
     contest entries would be games, but you proved us wrong.  Over 80% of
     them were utility programs.  Due to this we decided to have four
     categories: ACTION!, BASIC XL, MAC/65, and games.  The winner in each
     of these categories received a $100 credit toward the purchase of any
     OSS products.  The winners are:
     
     ACTION!:  Claude Galinsky of Watertown, MA won with his program that
          prints program listings on a serial printer.  Joseph Santorelli
          receives an Honorable Mention.
          
     BASIC XL:  Gary Baker of Dearborn, MI won with his program that sorts
          the variable list produced by the LVAR command.  Honorable
          Mentions go to Tim Roulo and Eric Alchowiak.
          
     MAC/65:  Donald Seay of Palmyra, VA won with his program that allows
          users to initialize their FX-100's to special print-out
          configurations.  Honorable Mentions go to James Granger, Evan
          Arnerich, and Rich Andrews.
          
     Games:  Greg Anderson of Los Gatos, CA won with his BASIC XL game
          "Squish".  Honorable Mentions go to Steven Grimm and Cheney Bath.
     




















     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                               Page 7









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     
                            BASIC XL Bugs and Fixes
                            -----------------------
     
     BUG: Version 1.03 doesn't seem to work with the extensions on the
          ToolKit.
     FIX: This is true only for early versions of the ToolKit.  If you have
          Vers. 1.03 and the ToolKit extensions work, then don't apply this
          fix.
               100 F$="D:EXTEND.COM":N=$02d6:Gosub 130
               110 F$="D:AUTORUN.SYS":N=$039f:Gosub 130
               120 End 
               130 Unprotect F$:Open #1,12,0,F$
               140   For I=1 To N:Get #1,C:Next I
               150 Put #1,9:Close #1:Protect F$
               160 Return
          
     BUG: Any program reference to line number 0 (e.g. Goto 0, If X=1 Then
          0) will not be RENUMbered.  This applies even if a previous RENUM
          created the reference (i.e. you did a RENUM 0,xx).
     FIX: There is no practicable solution.  Simply don't use a starting
          line number of 0 when you NUM or RENUM.
          
     BUG: You want to make sure that you're not in FAST mode.
     FIX: Make the following the first line in your program:
               10 IF PEEK($B9)&$80 THEN DEL 0
          $B9 is BASIC XL's FAST flag, and the DEL statement turns off FAST
          mode.  You can't have a line 0 in your program if you want to use
          this fix.
     
     
                             BUG/65 Bugs and Fixes
                             ---------------------
     
     BUG: The "P" option doesn't work with the newer Atari OS ROMs.
     FIX: On BBS and Bug Sheet, or refer to p. 7 of the Spring 1984
          newsletter.  This fix works with one exception: the last line
          doesn't get printed, so make sure your last line is just a
          RETURN.
          
     BUG: If you try to go into BUG immediately after you boot using
          DOSXL.XL, you get back to DOS instead of going into BUG.
     FIX: Press SYSTEM RESET and then run BUG.
     
     
                             DOS XL Bugs and Fixes
                             ---------------------
     
     BUG: The patch to convert version 2.30 to version 2.30p in our Spring
          1984 newsletter didn't work.
     FIX: Run the following program and then use INIT with the "Write
          DOS.SYS Only" option to write out the patched DOS.  Make sure
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                               Page 8









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
          that you don't have DOSXL.SYS (either .SUP or .XL version) active
          when you do this.
               100 READ CNT:IF CNT=0 THEN END 
               110 READ START
               120 FOR ADDR=START TO START+CNT-1
               130 READ BYTE:POKE ADDR,BYTE:NEXT ADDR
               140 GOTO 100
               150 DATA 3,5481,32,1,21
               160 DATA 29,5377,141,217,22,169,16
               170 DATA 141,23,22,169,23,141,24,22
               180 DATA 169,49,141,30,22,169,64,141
               190 DATA 12,0,169,21,141,13,0,96
               200 DATA 1,7425,112,0
          
     BUG: INIT does not work if you use drive numbers 4 through 8.
     FIX: Run the following program:
               10 OPEN #1,12,0,"D:INIT.COM"
               20 FOR I=1 TO 116 : GET #1,C : NEXT I
               30 PUT #1,ASC("9") : CLOSE #1
          
     BUG: Bill's DOS 2.0S patch for 1050's in his 8/84 - 9/84 Insight:
          Atari articles doesn't work with DOSXL.SYS.
     FIX: There isn't one, but don't despair: Bill's patch isn't compatible
          with DOS 2.5 anyway, so the problem becomes moot.
     
     
                        The Writer's Tool Bugs and Fixes
                        --------------------------------
     
     BUG: Version 2.2 LinkPrint crashes the system if you try to link an
          invalid or non- existent file.
     FIX: Run the following BASIC program  this program, first making sure
          that your WT file is called AUTORUN.SYS.  This will convert
          version 2.2 to 2.21.
               100 ? :? "Put a Backup of WT disk in Drive 1,":? "and hit
               START"
               110 IF PEEK(53279)<>6 THEN 110
               120 XIO 36,#1,0,0,"D:AUTORUN.SYS"
               130 OPEN #1,12,0,"D:AUTORUN.SYS"
               140 FOR I=1 TO 346:GET #1,X:NEXT I
               150 PRINT #1;"VERSION 2.21":CLOSE #1
               160 OPEN #1,12,0,"D:AUTORUN.SYS"
               170 FOR I=1 TO 14278:GET #1,X:NEXT I
               180 PUT #1,90:GET #1,X:PUT #1,91
               190 CLOSE #1:XIO 35,#1,0,0,"D:AUTORUN.SYS":END
     






     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                               Page 9









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     
                         ACTION! Questions and Answers
                         -----------------------------
     
     Q:   What is the best way to declare an ARRAY?
     A:   Always give the array a size or an address (unless you really
          want a floating pointer).  If you give it neither a size nor an
          address, your array will point to some arbitrary location, and
          could easily cause your system to lock-up or crash.
          
     Q:   What is the ACTION! RunTime disk, and what will it do for me?
     A:   The RunTime disk contains files that you INCLUDE in your ACTION!
          programs so that they will work without an ACTION! cartridge.
          This is useful if you want to distribute copies of utility or
          game programs to people who don't have the cartridge.  If you
          plan on giving away these programs, the RunTime license is
          $30.00.  If you're going to sell these programs, the publisher's
          license is $200.00.  You pay these fees once, and then may use
          the RunTime package with as many programs as you wish.
     
     
                         BASIC XE Questions and Answers
                         ------------------------------
     
     Q:   Why won't BASIC XE work properly with my 1030 or XM301 modem?
          
     A:   Without going into too much detail, it has to do with the way the
          1030 and XM301 handle the carrier detect signal.  When the modem
          answers the phone and connects with the calling modem, the 1030
          or XM301 uses a previously unused signal to tell the Atari
          computer that another modem has connected.  This line causes an
          interrupt and sometimes results in the handler failing to
          recognize the incoming call.  A fix for this problem is in the
          works, and will be included in the next version of BASIC XE to go
          into production.  Watch these pages for the news!
          
          
     Q:   What is Error #33?
          
     A:   Error #33 was left out of the manual, but if you look for error
          100, you will see that the manual says "Extensions not
          installed".  This usually happens when you have booted up a disk
          that does not have the BASICXE.OSS file on it, and try to use
          EXTEND or FAST or some other Extended Command.  The solution:
          Copy the file BASICXE.OSS onto the disks that you boot your
          system from.  DO NOT rename it to AUTORUN.SYS!!  It must be named
          BASICXE.OSS for BASIC XE to properly load the extensions.
     
     



     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 10









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     
                         BASIC XL Questions and Answers
                         ------------------------------
     
     Q:   Do the extensions on the ToolKit work with the RunTime package?
     A:   Not as shipped, because it would make the RunTime package
          unacceptably large for those who do not use the extensions.
          There is, however, a simple program available on the BBS that
          will allow you to use the extensions in conjunction with the
          RunTime package.
          
     Q:   How can I toggle my Bit3 board between 40 and 80 columns from
          BASIC XL?
     A:   It's possible if you have the Bit3 patch to DOS XL.  Simply run
          the patch from DOS, go into BASIC XL, and run the following
          program:
               10   For I=$100 TO $12F
               20   If Peek(I)=$68 Then Pop :Goto 50
               30   Next I
               40 Print "Can't Find Bit3 Toggle":End
               50 Toggle=I:Rem "Use USR(Toggle) to toggle 40/80 columns"
     
     
                          BUG/65 Questions and Answers
                          ----------------------------
     
     Q:   Why do I lose my program when I load BUG?
     A:   BUG doesn't know where your program resides so, if you don't
          specify where you want BUG to load, it can wipe out your program.
          There are two solutions to this: assemble to disk instead of
          memory, and then load your object file once you're in BUG, or
          specify a load address for BUG (your program can't reside above
          about $9800 since BUG loads there before relocating itself).
          
     Q:   Why does the system lock up when I trace ROM with BUG?
     A:   BUG cannot trace ROM, but (since ROM can't be changed) you might
          just use a "TS" command at the point where your code JSR's or
          JMP's to ROM.
     
     
                          DOS XL Questions and Answers
                          ----------------------------
     
     Q:   Can I get TYP to work with binary files as well as text files?  I
          could then use it instead of COPY to copy files from one drive to
          another.
     A:   There is a patch program on the BBS and in the DOS XL Bug Sheet
          that makes TYP work with binary files.
          
     Q:   Is there a RamDisk for the 130XE that works with DOS XL?
     A:   Yes, one similar to Atari DOS 2.5's RamDisk.  The file and
          documentation are on the BBS.
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 11









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     
     
                          MAC/65 Questions and Answers
                          ----------------------------
     
     Q:   How do I turn off the listing as a program assembles?
     A:   Either put a .OPT NOLIST at the beginning of your source file, or
          use #- as the list device in the ASM command, as in
               ASM ,#-,#D:FILE.OBJ
          
     Q:   How many labels are permitted in MAC?
     A:   The number of labels is limited only by memory size, but watch
          out - it is possible to have a symbol table so big that it can't
          be cross-referenced.  Also, there is a maximum of 63 .LOCAL
          sections.
          
     Q:   How can I change MAC's default screen colors?
     A:   With Disk MAC this is easy.  Version 4.20's screen colors are at
          $8B3F (background/playfield) and $8B44 (character luminance).
          Change these using the "C" command, and then BSAVE $8800 to $BC1F
          to MAC65.COM.  With cartridge MAC the process is a little more
          difficult.  Assemble the following program (making sure you write
          the object to disk), and then simply BLOAD it when you first
          enter MAC.  Change the two .BYTE values to get different default
          colors.
               100       .ORG $483
               110 BAK   .BYTE $00 ;Background Color
               120 LUM   .BYTE $06 ;Character Luminance
          
     Q:   Where can I get subroutines that turn the supercartridges on and
          off?
     A:   On our BBS.
          
     Q:   What memory is available for machine language programs and
          variables?
     A:   Parts of page 0 above $80, page 6 (most of the time), and between
          MEMLO ($2E7) and MEMHI ($2E5).  The size of the last area varies
          with DOS and graphics mode.  However, all of this depends upon
          what application program (if any) you are trying to interface
          with.  (See Bill's 12/84 Insight: Atari article.)
          
     Q:   How can I use the disk version of MAC/65 with Atari DOS?
     A:   Use the "L" option to load MAC65.COM, and then use the "M" option
          with 8800 (hex) as the address to run it.  (This applies only to
          vers. 4.2 of MAC.)
          
     Q:   Why does MAC "hang" for a while at the end of a large assembly?
     A:   MAC is sorting the symbol table so that the symbol listing is in
          alphabetical order.
          
     Q:   Why doesn't a JMP or JSR to zero page produce proper code in the
          MAC cart?
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 12









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     A:   Version 1.01 and 1.02 are fixed to produce the proper code (PS -
          1.02 is the latest version).  For update information see the
          update info sheet.
          
     Q:   Why do I get an Out-Of-Phase error (#13) during assembly?
     A:   For a complete discussion of phase errors and what they mean see
          Bill's 12/84 Insight: Atari article, or send us a SASE asking for
          it.
          
     Q:   How can I specify a RUN or INIT vector address within my object
          file?
     A:   Put the following at the end of your source file:
               *=        <vector>
               .WORD     <label>
          For a RUN vector, <vector> is $2E0 and <label> is the run address
          of your program.  For an INIT vector, <vector> is $2E2 and
          <label> is the init address of your program.  Also, a program can
          have both RUN and INIT vectors.
          
     Q:   How can I make my MAC program return to DOS when it's finished
          executing?
     A:   End your code either with an RTS (if you haven't messed with the
          stack) or an indirect jump through DOSVEC ($0A).
          
     Q:   Is there some location that controls how MAC works?
     A:   Yes and no.  The MAC cart uses bits of $CF to control some
          functions:
               $80 Bit   If 1, the space after a line number can be used as
                         a REP or FIND character (e.g. FIND/ LABEL/ will
                         find 10 LABEL).
               $40 Bit   If 1, MAC will not list lines changed by REP.
               $20 Bit   If 1, local variables will appear in the symbol
                         listing.
          When you enter DDT, it saves this flag at (LOMEM)+$CF, so you can
          change as follows: use the "E" command to find the contents of
          LOMEM ($80 & $81), add $CF to this two-byte value, and then use
          "D" to change the contents of this computed address.  When you
          return to MAC, your change is automatically copied into $CF.
          
     Q:   Why doesn't my RX-80 work with MAC?
     A:   The RX-80 (and some other printers) takes so long to do a form
          feed that MAC thinks that the printer has gone off-line.  To
          solve this problem, either press CONTROL 1 whenever the RX-80
          form feeds, or use .SET 3,0 in your program to force MAC to use
          multiple line feeds instead of form feed.
     






     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 13









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     
                               News You Can Use:
                               -----------------
     
     
     In this section we present items of interest to all Atari computer
     users.
     
                            Atari Corp. to go Public
     
     By now, most of you have probably heard the news:  Atari has filed
     with the SEC for an initial public offering of 4,500,000 shares of
     Common Stock through an underwriting group to be managed by Paine
     Webber.  The price range is anticipated to be between $11.50 and
     $13.50 per share, and offering is scheduled for mid- to late October.
     
     Atari Corp reports that total sales during the period from January 1,
     1986 to June 30, 1986 were $105,000,000, and profits were running over
     12%.  The average company typically aims for a 5% to 7% profit margin.
     
     
                               Atari Expositions
     
     The Atari Exposition shows appear to be doing quite well, generating a
     lot of interest in the capabilities of the Atari product line,
     including the 8-bit XE computers.  At the San Jose Atari Expo we
     recently attended, there were fairly huge crowds of people pushing
     their way around the auditorium.  Not bad for a show dedicated to the
     products of a company that was "on the skids" a few years back!
     
     We heard a lot of requests for "more software for the 8-bit Ataris."
     Some visitors to our booth felt that software producers had given up
     on the 8-bit computers.  I feel that the interest shown at these Expos
     can only help remind software companies that there are still a LOT of
     8-bit users out there and that they are VERY hungry for quality
     software.  One thing to remember is that YOU have to get involved.
     Make your desires known to the software companies--they won't bother
     producing software for a machine if they think the users have no need
     for it!  Write letters, make calls, join a users group!  Make NOISE!
     
     OSS has plans to introduce new software products for the 8-bit Atari
     computers.  We will be announcing these products in the near future.
     
     
                            XEP80 80 Column Adaptor
     
     The long awaited 80 Column adaptor is finally a reality.  We should be
     playing with one in-house here at OSS by the time you get this.
     
     The XEP80 has an 80 column by 25 line display, redefinable character
     sets, some form of bit-image graphics (I don't know what resolution),
     standard ATASCII block graphics characters, and a printer port built
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 14









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     in.  It will work with any composite video monitor, but for best
     results it should be used with a monochrome monitor.  The unit plugs
     into joystick port 1 or 2.
     
     Price has not been announced as of this writing.
     
     
                          New Atari Explorer Magazine
     
     The new Atari Explorer Magazine is here, put together by David Ahl (of
     Creative Computing fame) and friends.  It has a totally new look, and
     has some really useful information.  We just received our first copy
     the other day, and we are impressed!  It is right up there with the
     other Atari magazines in quality and content.  I for one am wishing
     Mr. Ahl the greatest of success in his new endeavor!
     
     
                              Pirate BBS Shut Down
     
     A group of software publishers working under the aegis of the Software
     Publishers Association have shut down a BBS in Cincinnati known as the
     Star Chamber.  The Star Chamber allegedly had 40-50 megabytes (!!) of
     copyrighted software available for downloads, mostly 8-bit and 16-bit
     Atari software.  Among the copyrighted material was a disassembled
     listing of the Apple Macintosh operating system, which could be used
     by some ST owners to build Macintosh emulators.
     
     Among the group of software publishers involved in the action were:
     Antic Software, Batteries Included, Digital Research, Hippopotamus
     Software, Infocom, Michtron, Megamax, Quickview Systems, Quantum
     Microsystems, Procopy, Regent Software, and Xlent Software.
     
     In a joint statement issued after the BBS was closed down, the members
     of the consortium vowed to continue pursuing legal action against
     pirate boards and any other centers of the illicit trade.
     
     
     














     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 15









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     
                               What is BareWare?
                               -----------------
     
          We feel that there is still a demand for high-quality, reasonably
     priced software for the Atari computers, both 8 and 16 bit. By
     reasonably priced, I mean under $30.
     
     So what's the problem?  Support!  
     
          While we understand the need for continued high-quality support
     for our products, we cannot profitably market software for under $40
     and still provide our normal level of support.
     
          So -- what's a company like OSS to do?
     
          Well, we could just charge $35-$50 for these programs, but that
     just wouldn't be right!
     
          Why not sell the software at a minimal cost, just enough to cover
     advertising and materials, and the royalty to the programmer?  How
     about offering no telephone support on those products?  That way we
     aren't "adding in" a fee for support when the product is purchased.
     People who don't need or want the support (there are a lot of those!)
     aren't penalized up front!
     
          This is why we started BareWare.  BareWare is a new way for us to
     market software.  BareWare will bring to market all those programs
     that people would love to have but can't justify paying the high
     prices for them.
     
          As of this writing, we are still putting the finishing touches on
     BareWare products for the 8 bit line, including an ACTION! Graphics
     ToolKit!  In the meantime, if you are (or anyone you know is) working
     on a great piece of software that you think others would love to use,
     let us know!  Don't be shy!  We have only a few rules for BareWare
     products:  Programs must be bug-free, well documented, and they must
     be a good solution to a problem.  We are happy to review any and all
     programs which fit these qualities.
     
     
     
                           OSS Has T-Shirts for sale!
                           --------------------------
     
     Be the first one on your block (or in your users group) to wear the
     incredible  all-new OSS T-Shirt!  Amaze your friends, impress your
     boss, improve your love life!*
     
     High quality Haynes all-cotton t-shirts: Navy blue, yellow
     silk-screened with the slogan "OSS Programmers do it top down".
     
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 16









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     The price?  A mere $7.50 each, plus $2.00 postage and handling.  Be
     sure to specify Small, Medium, Large, or Extra Large.
     
                                  *DISCLAIMER:
     
     OSS does not really mean to suggest that buying our t-shirt will cause
     these things to happen, but you never can tell!
     
     
     
                                Update Policies
                                ---------------
     
     We at OSS have always tried to maintain a reputation for taking care
     of our customers.  To that end, we would like to say that we can
     provide free updates of all our products to all our loyal customers.
     
     Unfortunately, because of our low prices (compared to other systems
     software companies) and deep dealer and distributor discounts, we
     really don't make enough of a profit on our products to be able to do
     this and still remain in business.  However, we do endeavour to price
     our updates as reasonably as possible.  We try to come close to
     breaking even on these updates, as prices reflect only our costs plus
     shipping and packaging expenses.
     
     In any case, then, here is our update price list.  Cartridge updates
     are returned to you via U.S. Mail (1st Class) unless otherwise
     specified.  Shipping charges are $5.00 unless payment is made via
     check or money order in which case shipping charges are waived.
     Foreign users should estimate shipping costs or use a credit card.
     
                               UPDATE PRICE LIST
                               -----------------
     
     All OSS Cartridges may be updated to the latest version by returning
     the old cartridge and a check or money order for $20.00.  Current
     revision levels are as follows:  BASIC XE--4.1;  ACTION!--3.6;
     MAC/65--1.01;  BASIC XL--1.03;  Writer's Tool--2.1
     
     California Residents please add 7.0% sales tax.
     
     










     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 17









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     
                       CELLS written in ACTION! from OSS
                                by David Plotkin
                       ---------------------------------
     
          When I was in college taking computer science, we were required
     to program a simulation called LIFE.  The idea is to try to duplicate
     the conditions in a culture of cells.  This is fairly common, and
     there are quite a number of algorithims that can be used as part of
     this simulation.  What follows is just one of the many variations of
     LIFE.
     
          CELLS is a graphic demo in ANTIC mode 4 (four color character
     mode) which illustrates some of ACTION's blinding speed.  Using a
     custom designed character set and fast PLOT routine it "grows" and
     "kills" cells on the screen creating multicolored, everchanging
     patterns which are fun to watch, with a  relaxing sound track in the
     backround.  The actual algorithim for cell growth is quite simple, and
     was developed by Bill Atkinson, of MACPAINT fame.  Essentially, if a
     cell has more than three or less than two neighbors occupying the
     eight adjoining squares, it dies.  If an empty space has three
     neighbors, then a new cell grows.  This demo is even more impressive
     on the Macintosh, which runs at eight times the Atari's speed, but
     with some programming tricks and a redefined character set, it looks
     pretty nice on the Atari.  Note the use of elements of an array in
     PROC GrowEm to determine what occupies the surrounding cell locations.
     This works much faster than using eight LOCATEs.
     
          To play with CELLS, compile and run it from the ACTION monitor.
     The title screen will prompt you to press SELECT, and you will have a
     blank screen with a cursor.  You move the cursor with your joystick,
     pressing the fire button on a blank space lays down one of thirteen
     colorful cells, pressing the fire button where there is already a cell
     erases it.  When you are done laying down your initial cell pattern,
     just press START and the cell growth will start.  The patterns will
     continue to shift until either all the cells have died, or no further
     changes in the cell patterns can occur.  This last can happen, for
     example, when cells are grouped in a square of four cells--no new
     cells will grow under these circumstances.  At this point, the program
     will prompt you to press FIRE to play again.  At any time while the
     cells are growing and dying, you may press SELECT to return to the
     screen where you can add and delete cells.  If you do this, the cursor
     won't become visible until you move it with your joystick.  Pressing
     START will once again return you to the "growing and dying" screen.
     Note that the prompts for changing screens (START or SELECT) are
     printed in the lower right corner of the screen so you won't forget
     how the program works.  The program records the current number of live
     cells, as well as the maximum number of cells that have been alive at
     any point during the current game.  You can even compete by trying to
     come up with initial patterns that produce the highest number of
     maximum cells. My highest number of cells is 369.  Beat it if you can!
     
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 18









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     
     
                       Print Using & Scientific Notation
                                 with BASIC XE
                                 by Tom Pitman
                       ---------------------------------
     
          BASIC XE is by far the best BASIC available for the Atari 8-bit
     line of computers (and arguably for any 8-bit computer anywhere!)
     After using this fine product for several weeks, I found myself at
     home needing to do some calculations for work.  I sat down, threw
     together the code, prepared to format my output, and HORRORS(!!?)
     There was no format to use scientific notation with PRINT USING.  But
     being a resourceful character, and having a reasonable knowledge of
     how BASIC stores numbers I proceded to write "ScientificNotation", a
     procedure that, given a number, returns an integer part (IPART), a
     decimal part (DPART), and an exponent part (EPART).  These three
     numbers can then easily be incorporated into a PRINT USING statement.
     
                                   Breakdown
                                   ---------
     
          First, at line 30010 we trap to make sure we don't get an error
     for dimensioning our strings, and array more than once.
     
          At 30020, we dimension GARBAGE$, and TRASH(0).  The trick here is
     that the 1 element long string will help us access the address of the
     PARAMETER of the procedure.
     
          At 30040, we assign TRASH(0) equal to PARAMETER.  The address of
     this array is found in line 30050.  (The internal format of numbers is
     discussed on page 23 of the BASIC XE manual.)
     
          From 30080 to 30110, we check the high order bit of the Exponent
     byte to see if the Mantissa (integer part) is positive or negative,
     and adjust the exponent accordingly.
     
          Next, from 30130 to 30210, we check to see if the mantissa is 10
     or more.  If it isn't, we need to adjust the last character of Dec$
     accordingly.  If it is, we need to adjust IPART, Dec$, and flag
     ourselves that EPART needs to be 1 greater.
     
          Finally, Dec$ is filled with the decimal values and is converted
     to DPART, and the 3 values are returned.  These values can now be used
     accurately in a PRINT USING statement.  The program SCINOTE.DEM
     illustrates the procedure at work, and how to set up the PRINT USING
     format.
     
          This procedure can easily be altered for use with a smaller
     field, or to print in Engineering notation.  If you really have no
     need for this type of feature, maybe it gave you a deeper insight into
     some of the inner workings of your computer.  Happy trails.
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 19









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     
     
                                  3-D FRACTALS
                                by David Plotkin
                                ----------------
     
          One of the hottest topics in mathematics today is FRACTALS.
     Invented by Benoit Mandelbrot, Fractal theory seeks to link
     mathematics and nature.  A popular example of a fractal shape in
     nature is a coastline.  No matter how closely you scrutinize and
     measure a coastline, you can never get its exact length, due to the
     infinite number of irregularities in it.  The closer you zoom in on
     the coastline, the more accurate your measure of its length.  But each
     time you zoom in closer, you discover more irregularities, so the
     measured length of the coastline will increase.  Fractals are like
     this coastline, except that they are described by a complex series of
     equations.  No matter how close you "zoom in" on your fractal shape,
     you will discover more irregularities in its shape.  In this, it
     imitates nature.  Another seeming oddity of fractals is that although
     a fractal shape may be able to be confined within a finite area (you
     can draw a circle around the shape which completely contains it), the
     length of the fractal is infinite, because of the infinite
     irregularities.
     
          Various examples of two dimensional fractals have appeared in
     past issues of various computer magazines, as well as the Scientific
     American and Discover.  Computer generated 3-D fractals are especially
     useful for producing artificial landscapes.  That is, landscapes,
     including mountain ranges, peaks, and valleys, which look real and can
     be "traveled over" using a computer simulation, but which don't
     actually exist.  The highly popular simulation/game "Rescue on
     Fractulus" from Epyx uses this tecnique.
     
          The algorithim for producing an artificial landscape using
     fractals can be something like this:
     
     1.   Start with a triangle.  Connect the centers of each of the
          triangle's sides together with lines.  This breaks the larger
          triangle into 4 smaller triangles.
          
     2.   Move the vertices (points) of each of the trianges so formed
          either up or down a random amount.
          
     3.   Repeat the above two procedures on each of the triangles formed
          by step 1, creating more (and smaller triangles).
     
          The series of steps outlined above can be repeated as many times
     as there is available memory in your computer.  Each time, the
     resolution gets higher, and the "landscape" formed looks closer to a
     natural landscape.  The limits to this process are two-fold.  First,
     as mentioned above, the available memory of your computer will
     eventually cause you to have to stop.  Each of the coordinates of the
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 20









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     triangles must be stored in an array, and arrays take up memory.
     Also, the screen resolution of your computer makes it pointless to
     continue beyond a certain point.
     
          The listing included will generate a 3-D landscape on the screen,
     using the algorithim detailed above.  Each time the program is run,
     the landscape generated will be different.  The program will ask you
     how many levels you want.  The higher the number of levels, the better
     the resolution.  Do not ask for more than six levels, or you will get
     an error.  Also, be warned, that each additional level adds
     considerably to the time it takes to draw the fractal shape on the
     screen.
     







































     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 21









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     
                       ASCII/ATASCII Text File Converter
                            By Christopher M. Kelley
                       ---------------------------------
     
          How many times have you downloaded a file from your local BBS
     only to find that instead of the normal ATASCII return, there is a
     CTRL-M, CTRL-J pair(the ASCII carriage return - line feed pair)?  And
     how many times have you then loaded that file into your favorite text
     editor and changed them by hand because you couldn't REPLACE with a
     return?  Or waited and waited for a BASIC program to search through a
     file byte by byte and replace those CTRL-M, CTRL-J pairs with returns?
     Or maybe like me you also own an ST or other ASCII-based computer and
     would like to transfer text files back and forth, but hate the thought
     of having to convert the returns?
     
          Well, this program is the answer.  CONVERT.COM is simple to use,
     and since it was written and assembled with Mac/65, it is VERY fast.
     It should work on any Atari 8-bit computer, so XL owners can use it
     too.  To use CONVERT.COM, load it from any DOS, with or without a
     cartridge (any program in memory will be lost, however).  Three
     chocies will be displayed:
                         [1] ASCII To ATASCII
                         [2] ATASCII To ASCII
                         [Q] Quit
                         
          The menu items are, I feel, very straightforward.  ASCII to
     ATASCII searches for CTRL-M, CTRL-J pairs and replaces them with
     ATASCII returns.  ATASCII to ASCII searches for ATASCII returns and
     replaces them with CTRL-M, CTRL-J pairs.  If you choose either of the
     first two options, you will be prompted for a filename to convert.
     The Dn: specifier (where n is the drive number) can be used, but if it
     is not entered, D1: will be assumed.  The program will then try to
     open the file.  If the file cannot be found or there is an error, it
     will ask again for a filename.
     
          Next, it will ask for an output file.
     
          WARNING:  DO NOT USE THE SAME FILE NAME FOR THE OUTPUT FILE AS
     GIVEN FOR THE FILE TO CONVERT OR THE FILE WILL BE LOST AND OTHER DATA
     ON THE DISK MAY BE LOST! You mus supply two different file names for
     correct operation of this program!
     
          Again, the Dn: prefix is not necessary, but may be used.  The
     program will try to open the file, and if there is some problem, it
     will ask again for an output filename.  If all goes well it will
     convert the text file.  If there is some error during the conversion,
     an error message will be displayed and the conversion will be
     cancelled.  At this point, press RETURN to return to the options menu.
     If there is no error, a message to that effect will be printed, and
     pressing RETURN will again return to the options menu.  Please note
     that the program can ONLY be used to convert text files, it cannot
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 22









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     convert programs.  The Quit option, of course, returns to DOS.
     
          The source code for the program is called CONVERT.M65 and is in
     LISTed form. The program breaks down as follows:
     
               1000 - 1300 ; set up program  labels and start program
               labels from Mapping The Atari)
               1310 - 1830 ; .BYTE statements
               1840 - 2050 ; open channel 1 to the editor
               2060 - 2540 ; print menu, get and analyze answer
               2550 - 2800 ; print text subroutine
               2810 - 2990 ; get answer/filename subroutine
               3000 - 4630 ; get and open input/output files
               4640 - 5750 ; conversion routines
               5120 - 5410 ; get/put bytes from files
               5760 - 6040 ; end conversion normally
               6050 - 6310 ; end conversion after fatal error
               6320 - 6370 ; set up run address, end assembly
     
          If you examine the code, you will notice that instead of loading
     the file into a buffer, then converting and writing, the program reads
     a byte, checks it, then writes either the  byte or the appropriate
     return sequence.  The reason for this is twofold.  First, the program
     is much easier to write this way, and second, a file of any length can
     be converted, even if it is too big to fit into memory.  In addition,
     because it is written in assembly, there is little sacrifice in speed.
     
          I have tried to make the program modular, using subroutines to
     put messages and data, and to get choices, filenames, and data.  This
     means the program can be much smaller and the code easier to read (it
     is also good programming style, or so I am told).  I believe that
     someone who has not used CIO in assembly language might learn
     something from reading the code.  I know I learned a whole lot writing
     it! I would like to add that writing the program was made much easier
     by the use of DDT in the Mac/65 cartridge and OMNIMON! from CDY
     Consulting.
     
     [Editor's Note:  For those of you who do not have MAC/65 and would
     like to use the CONVERT program, we have included the CONVERT.COM file
     on the newsletter disk for you to use.  Use the (L)oad binary file
     from DOS 2.5 or just type in "CONVERT" from DOSXL.]
     










     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 23









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     MODULE; CELLS by David Plotkin
     BYTE ChrBase=756,Bkgrnd=710,X,Y,
          Fate=53770,Level=[1],CursIn=752,
          Stick=632,Ps,Loud=[0],Indx=[0],
          Snd1=$D208,Snd2=$D20F,Freq=[169],
          Wsync=$D40A,Colbk=$D018,     
          Nmien=$D40E,Consol=53279,
          Colints=$D017,Atract=77,L1=[0],
          L2
     
     CARD Scrn=88,RamSet,HiMem=$2E5,
          Score=[0],Sdlst=560,
          Vdslst=512,Cells=[0],Max=[0]
     
     INT  Xdir,Ydir
     
     CARD ARRAY Linept(24)
     
     BYTE ARRAY Charset,Dlist,
         ShapeTable(0)=[
         0 20 20 85 85 20 20 0;  1
         40 150 150 190 190 150 150 40;2
         40 190 150 170 170 150 190 40;3
         60 235 235 215 215 235 235 60;4
         60 215 215 235 235 215 215 60;5
         60 215 235 255 255 235 215 60;6
         20 125 105 85 85 105 125 20;7
         20 105 105 125 125 105 105 20;8
         130 40 60 20 20 60 40 130;  9
         195 60 20 40 40 20 60 195;  10
         65 20 40 60 60 40 20 60   ; 11
         190 235 215 195 195 215 235 190;12
         235 130 150 170 170 150 130 235;13
         ]
     
     PROC Download()
     ;Step back HiMem and move the
     ;character set into RAM
     RamSet=(HiMem-$400)&$FC00;1K boundary
     ChrBase=RamSet RSH 8
     HiMem=RamSet
     MOVEBLOCK(RamSet,57344,1024)
     Charset=RamSet
     RETURN
     
     PROC Modify()
     ;Modify the RAM character set
     CARD xx
     FOR xx=0 TO 103
     DO
       Charset(xx+8)=ShapeTable(xx)
     OD
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 24









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     RETURN
     
     PROC Dlint()
     ;the display list interrupt routine
     [$48 $8A $48 $98 $48]
     Wsync=1 Colbk=50 Colints=12
     [$68 $A8 $68 $AA $68 $40]
     
     PROC ScoreLine()
     ;set up the dli
     Vdslst=Dlint Dlist(27)=132 Nmien=$C0
     RETURN
     
     PROC Title()
     BYTE colpf0=53270,colpf1=53271,
          colpf2=53273,colpf3=53273,
          rtclock=20,vcount=54283
     GRAPHICS(18)
     POSITION(7,4) PRINTD(6,"CELLS")
     POSITION(8,5) PRINTD(6,"BY")
     POSITION(3,7)
     PRINTD(6,"david plotkin")
     POSITION(3,9)
     PRINTD(6,"PRESS select")
     WHILE Consol<>5
     DO colpf3=Fate Wsync=0
       colpf0=128-vcount+rtclock RSH 2
       colpf1=vcount+rtclock RSH 2
     OD
     RETURN
     
     PROC Gr4Init()
     ;Set up the address of each screen
     ;line,initialize and set up Gr. 4
     CARD xx
     BYTE clr1=709
     GRAPHICS(0) CursIn=1 PRINT(" ")
     FOR xx=0 TO 23
     DO Linept(xx)=Scrn+(40*xx) OD
     Dlist=Sdlst Dlist(3)=68
     FOR xx=6 TO 27
     DO Dlist(xx)=4 OD X=10 Y=10 clr1=68
     RETURN
     
     PROC Update()
     ;print data on the text line
     POSITION(0,23) PRINT("Cells: ")
     POSITION(7,23) PRINTC(Cells)
     POSITION(15,23) PRINT("Max Cells: ")
     POSITION(26,23) PRINTC(Max)
     Atract=0
     RETURN
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 25









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     
     PROC Plot4(BYTE x,y,ch)
     ;Plot a char at location x,y
     BYTE ARRAY line
     line=Linept(y) line(x)=ch
     RETURN
     
     BYTE FUNC Locate4(BYTE x,y)
     ;Returns the value of the char at x,y
     BYTE ARRAY line
     line=Linept(y)
     RETURN(line(x))
     
     INT FUNC HStick(BYTE port)
     BYTE ARRAY ports(4)=$278
     INT ARRAY value(4)=[0 1 $FFFF 0]
     port==&3
     RETURN (value((ports(port)&$C) RSH 2))
     
     INT FUNC VStick(BYTE port)
     BYTE ARRAY ports(4)=$278
     INT ARRAY value(4)=[0 1 $FFFF 0]
     port==&3
     RETURN (value(ports(port)&3))
     
     PROC MoveCursor()
     ;move cursor under joystick control
     BYTE time=20,xx,yy,trig=644,flg1=[0]
     IF flg1=0 THEN flg1=1
       L2=Locate4(xx,yy) Plot4(X,Y,1)
       L1=L2
     FI
     IF trig=0 THEN Xdir=1 Ydir=0 ELSE
       Xdir=HStick(0) Ydir=VStick(0)
     FI
     IF Xdir=0 AND Ydir=0 THEN 
       Plot4(X,Y,L2) flg1=0 RETURN
     FI
     xx=X+Xdir yy=Y+Ydir
     IF xx>38 THEN xx=1 ELSEIF
       xx<1 THEN xx=38
     FI
     IF yy>22 THEN yy=1 ELSEIF
       yy<1 THEN yy=22
     FI 
     IF trig=0 THEN
       IF L1=0 THEN L1=RAND(12)+2 Cells==+1
         ELSE L1=0 Cells==-1
       FI
     FI
     L2=Locate4(xx,yy) Plot4(X,Y,L1)
     L1=L2 X=xx Y=yy Plot4(X,Y,1) time=0 
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 26









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     DO SOUND(0,xx LSH 2+yy LSH 2,10,     
                    4+(1-trig)LSH 3)
       UNTIL time=2
     OD SOUND(0,0,0,0)
     DO UNTIL trig=1 OD
     RETURN
     
     PROC AllDone()
     ;all the cells are dead
     BYTE trig=644,wsync=$D40A,rtclock=20,
          lm=53271,vcount=54283
     SNDRST() Bkgrnd=0 Dlist(10)=2
     Update()
     POSITION(7,5)
     PRINT("All DONE  Press FIRE") 
     DO vcount=0  lm=vcount+rtclock RSH 2
       UNTIL trig=0
     OD
     DO UNTIL trig=1 OD
     Bkgrnd=148 Dlist(10)=4 PUT(125)
     Cells=0 Max=0 Update()
     POSITION(33,23) PRINT("START ")
     DO MoveCursor() UNTIL Consol=6 OD
     POSITION(33,23) PRINT("SELECT")
     RETURN
     
     PROC GrowEm()
     ;grow and kill the cells
     BYTE xx,yy,lp,wh,test,cell,flg,ind=[0]
     BYTE ARRAY line,hold(8), 
     tune(0)=[243 243 162 182 162 182 193
     243 243],tune1(0)=[162 96 108 121 108
     121 128 162 162]
     flg=0
     FOR yy=1 TO 21; each row
     DO FOR xx=1 TO 38; each column
      DO line=Linept(yy-1)+(xx-1)
       hold(0)=line(0) hold(1)=line(1)
       hold(2)=line(2) hold(3)=line(42)
       hold(4)=line(82) hold(5)=line(81)
       hold(6)=line(80) hold(7)=line(40)
       test=0 wh=line(41)
       FOR lp=0 TO 7
       DO IF hold(lp)>0 THEN test==+1 FI OD
       IF wh=0 AND test=3 THEN
        cell=RAND(12)+2 Cells==+1 flg=1
        Plot4(xx,yy,cell) ELSEIF
        wh>0 AND (test<2 OR test>3) THEN
        Plot4(xx,yy,0) Cells==-1
       FI
      OD
     OD 
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 27









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     IF Cells=0 OR flg=0 THEN AllDone() FI
     POSITION(7,23) PRINTC(Cells)         
     PRINT(" ")
     ;SOUND(0,tune(ind),10,4)
     ;SOUND(1,tune1(ind),10,4) ind==+1
     ;IF ind=8 THEN ind=0 FI
     IF Max<Cells THEN Max=Cells 
       POSITION(26,23) PRINTC(Max)
     FI
     IF Consol=5 THEN SNDRST()
       POSITION(33,23) PRINT("START ")
       DO MoveCursor() UNTIL Consol=6 OD
       POSITION(33,23) PRINT("SELECT")
     FI
     RETURN
     
     PROC Main()
     BYTE time=20,lp,ch=764
     Title() Gr4Init() Snd1=0 Snd2=3
     Download() Modify() ScoreLine()
     Plot4(X,Y,1) Update()
     POSITION(33,23) PRINT("START ")
     DO MoveCursor() UNTIL Consol=6 OD
     POSITION(33,23) PRINT("SELECT")
     DO GrowEm() OD
     RETURN
     
     
























     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 28









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     30000 Procedure "ScientificNotation" Using Parameter
     30010   Trap 30300
     30020   Dim Garbage$(1),Trash(0),Dec$(9)
     30030   Local Dpart,Ipart,Epart,Flag,Temp,Sign,Parmadr
     30040   Trash(0)=Parameter
     30050   Parmadr=Adr(Garbage$)+1
     30060   Flag=0:Sign=1
     30070   Epart=Peek(Parmadr)
     30080   If Epart&128=128
     30090     Sign=-1
     30100     Epart=Epart-128
     30110   Endif 
     30120   Ipart=Val(Hex$(Peek(Parmadr+1)))
     30130   If Ipart>9
     30140     Temp=Ipart/10
     30150     Ipart=Int(Temp)
     30160     Temp=(Temp-Ipart)*10
     30170     Flag=1
     30180     Dec$(1,1)=Right$(Str$(Temp),1)
     30190   Else 
     30200     Dec$(9,9)="0"
     30210   Endif 
     30220   Epart=(Epart-64)*2+Flag
     30230   Ipart=Ipart*Sign
     30240   Dec$(Flag+1,Flag+2)=Right$(Hex$(Peek(Parmadr+2)),2)
     30250   Dec$(Flag+3,Flag+4)=Right$(Hex$(Peek(Parmadr+3)),2)
     30260   Dec$(Flag+5,Flag+6)=Right$(Hex$(Peek(Parmadr+4)),2)
     30270   Dec$(Flag+7,Flag+8)=Right$(Hex$(Peek(Parmadr+5)),2)
     30280   Dpart=Val(Dec$)
     30290 Exit Ipart,Dpart,Epart
     30300 Cont 
     




















     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 29









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     10 Rem DEMO USING "ScientificNotation"
     15 Rem by Thomas C. Pitman
     20 For Ax=1 To 10
     30   Trap 30:Input "ENTER A NUMBER->",Digit
     40   Call "ScientificNotation" Using Digit To Ip,Dp,Ep
     50   Print  Using "#######.####  -# /.&&&&&&&&&E+&&",Digit,Ip,Dp,Ep
     60 Next Ax
     70 End 
     30000 Procedure "ScientificNotation" Using Parameter
     30010   Trap 30300
     30020   Dim Garbage$(1),Trash(0),Dec$(9)
     30030   Local Dpart,Ipart,Epart,Flag,Temp,Sign,Parmadr
     30040   Trash(0)=Parameter
     30050   Parmadr=Adr(Garbage$)+1
     30060   Flag=0:Sign=1
     30070   Epart=Peek(Parmadr)
     30080   If Epart&128=128
     30090     Sign=-1
     30100     Epart=Epart-128
     30110   Endif 
     30120   Ipart=Val(Hex$(Peek(Parmadr+1)))
     30130   If Ipart>9
     30140     Temp=Ipart/10
     30150     Ipart=Int(Temp)
     30160     Temp=(Temp-Ipart)*10
     30170     Flag=1
     30180     Dec$(1,1)=Right$(Str$(Temp),1)
     30190   Else 
     30200     Dec$(9,9)="0"
     30210   Endif 
     30220   Epart=(Epart-64)*2+Flag
     30230   Ipart=Ipart*Sign
     30240   Dec$(Flag+1,Flag+2)=Right$(Hex$(Peek(Parmadr+2)),2)
     30250   Dec$(Flag+3,Flag+4)=Right$(Hex$(Peek(Parmadr+3)),2)
     30260   Dec$(Flag+5,Flag+6)=Right$(Hex$(Peek(Parmadr+4)),2)
     30270   Dec$(Flag+7,Flag+8)=Right$(Hex$(Peek(Parmadr+5)),2)
     30280   Dpart=Val(Dec$)
     30290 Exit Ipart,Dpart,Epart
     30300 Cont 
     












     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 30









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     10 Fast :Color 1
     20 Dim D(64,33),Pr$(1):Bx=0:By=0
     30 Graphics 0:Poke 752,1:Position 5,10:Print "Number of Levels";:Input
     Le
     40 Ds=2^Le+1
     50 Mx=Ds-1:My=Mx/2:Pi=3.1416:Rh=Pi/6:Vt=-Pi/5
     51 Rc=Cos(Rh):Rs=Sin(Rh)
     52 Vc=Cos(Vt):Vs=Sin(Vt)
     60   For N=1 To Le:L=10000/1.8^N
     70   Print "WORKING ON LEVEL ";N
     80   Ib=Mx/2^N:Sk=Ib*2
     90   Print "";:Gosub 150:Rem ASSIGN HEIGHTS ALONG    X IN ARRAY
     100   Print "";:Gosub 220:Rem ASSIGN HEIGHTS ALONG   Y IN ARRAY
     110   Print "";:Gosub 290:Rem ASSIGN HEIGHTS ALONG   DIAG. IN ARRAY
     120   Next N
     130 Goto 640:Rem DRAW
     140 Rem HEIGHTS ALONG X
     150   For Ye=0 To Mx-1 Step Sk
     160     For Xe=Ib+Ye To Mx Step Sk
     170     Ax=Xe-Ib:Ay=Ye:Gosub 370:D1=D:Ax=Xe+Ib:Gosub 370:D2=D
     180     D=(D1+D2)/2+(Rnd(0)-0.5)*L/2:Ax=Xe:Ay=Ye:Gosub 420
     190     Next Xe
     200   Next Ye:Return 
     210 Rem HEIGHTS ALONG Y
     220   For Xe=Mx To 1 Step -Sk
     230     For Ye=Ib To Xe Step Sk
     240     Ax=Xe:Ay=Ye+Ib:Gosub 370:D1=D:Ay=Ye-Ib:Gosub 370:D2=D
     250     D=(D1+D2)/2+(Rnd(0)-0.5)*L/2:Ax=Xe:Ay=Ye:Gosub 420
     260     Next Ye
     270   Next Xe:Return 
     280 Rem HEIGHTS ALONG DIAGONAL
     290   For Xe=0 To Mx-1 Step Sk
     300     For Ye=Ib To Mx-Xe Step Sk
     310     Ax=Xe+Ye-Ib:Ay=Ye-Ib:Gosub 370:D1=D
     320     Ax=Xe+Ye+Ib:Ay=Ye+Ib:Gosub 370:D2=D
     330     Ax=Xe+Ye:Ay=Ye:D=(D1+D2)/2+(Rnd(0)-0.5)*L/2:Gosub 420
     340     Next Ye
     350   Next Xe:Return 
     360 Rem RETURN DATA FROM ARRAY
     370 If Ay>My Then 390
     380 By=Ay:Bx=Ax:Goto 400
     390 By=Mx+1-Ay:Bx=Mx-Ax
     400 D=D(Abs(Int(Bx)),By):Return 
     410 Rem PUT DATA INTO ARRAY
     420 If Ay>My Then 440
     430 By=Ay:Bx=Ax:Goto 450
     440 By=Mx+1-Ay:Bx=Mx-Ax
     450 D(Bx,By)=D:Return 
     630 Rem DISPLAY HERE
     640 Gosub 1110:Rem SET UP SCREEN
     650 Xs=0.04:Ys=0.04:Zs=0.04:Rem SCALING      FACTORS
     660   For Ax=0 To Mx:X0=-999:  For Ay=0 To Ax
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 31









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     670     Gosub 370:Zz=D:Yy=Ay/Mx*10000:Xx=Ax/Mx*10000-Yy/2
     680     Gosub 940:Next Ay:Next Ax
     690   For Ay=0 To Mx:X0=-999:  For Ax=Ay To Mx
     700     Gosub 370:Zz=D:Yy=Ay/Mx*10000:Xx=Ax/Mx*10000-Yy/2
     710     Gosub 940:Next Ax:Next Ay
     720   For Ex=0 To Mx:X0=-999:  For Ey=0 To Mx-Ex
     730     Ax=Ex+Ey:Ay=Ey:Gosub 370:Zz=D:Yy=Ay/Mx*10000
     740     Xx=Ax/Mx*10000-Yy/2:Gosub 940:Next Ey:Next Ex
     750 Goto 1130
     760 Rem ROTATE
     770 Ox=Xx
     780 Xx=Xx*Rc-Yy*Rs
     790 Yy=Ox*Rs+Yy*Rc
     800 Return 
     850 Rem TILT DOWN
     860 Ox=Xx
     870 Xx=Vc*Xx-Vs*Zz
     880 Zz=Vs*Ox+Vc*Zz
     890 Return 
     930 Rem MOVE OR DRAWTO (XP,YP)
     940 Rem 
     950 Xx=Xx*Xs:Yy=Yy*Ys:Zz=Zz*Zs
     960 Gosub 770:Rem ROTATE
     970 Gosub 860:Rem TILT UP
     990 Xp=Int(Yy)+Cx:Yp=Int(Zz)
     1000 Gosub 1030
     1010 Return 
     1020 Rem PLOT LINE HERE
     1030 Xp=Xp*0.625:Yp=33.14-0.663*Yp
     1040 If X0=-999 Then X8=Xp:Y8=Yp:X0=X
     1045 If Y8>179 Or Y8<0 Or Yp>179 Or Yp<0 Then Return 
     1050 Plot X8,Y8:Drawto Xp,Yp:X8=Xp:Y8=Yp:Return 
     1060 Rem SWITCH TO SEA COLOR
     1070 Color 2:Return 
     1080 Rem SWITCH TO LAND COLOR
     1090 Color 1:Return 
     1100 Rem SET UP SCREEN
     1110 Graphics 8:Poke 710,0:Return 
     1130   For Wait=150 To 10 Step -10:Sound 0,Wait,10,Wait/10:Next
     Wait:Sound 0,0,0,0
     1135 Poke 656,0:Poke 657,0:Print "PRESS ANY KEY...";:Poke 754,255
     1140 If Peek(754)=255 Then Poke 77,0:Goto 1140
     1150 Goto 30
     








     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 32









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     1000 ;LIST#D:CONVERT.M65
     1010 ;
     1020 ;
     1030 ;
     1040 ;ASM,,#D:CONVERT.COM
     1050 ;
     1060 ; ===========================
     1070 ;  ASCII - ATASCII Converter
     1080 ;  by: Christopher M. Kelley
     1090 ;  for: OSS, Inc. Newsletter
     1100 ; ===========================
     1110 ;
     1120     .OPT NO LIST
     1130 ;
     1140 ;Labels
     1150 ;
     1160 DOSVEC = $0A
     1170 LMARGN = $52
     1180 SAVLOC = $CB
     1190 INVFLG = $02B6
     1200 SHFLOK = $02BE
     1210 ICCOM = $0342
     1220 ICBAL = $0344
     1230 ICBAH = $0345
     1240 ICBLL = $0348
     1250 ICBLH = $0349
     1260 ICAX1 = $034A
     1270 CIOV =  $E456
     1280 ;
     1290 ;Start
     1300 ;
     1310     *=  $4000
     1320 BEGIN
     1330     JMP START
     1340 ;
     1350 ;Text
     1360 ;
     1370 TEXT
     1380     .BYTE $7D,$9B,"   ASCII/ATASCII Text File Converter",$9B
     1390     .BYTE " (c)1986 Christopher M. Kelley and
     OSS.",$9B,$9B,$9B,$9B
     1400     .BYTE $7F,"Conversion Type:",$9B
     1410     .BYTE $7F,"  [1]ASCII To ATASCII",$9B
     1420     .BYTE $7F,"  [2]ATASCII To ASCII",$9B
     1430     .BYTE $7F,"  [Q]Quit",$9B,$9B,$9B
     1440 ;
     1450 QUSTN
     1460     .BYTE $1C,$9C,$7F,"Please Choose:",$00
     1470 ;
     1480 RETURN
     1490     .BYTE $9B,$9B,$00
     1500 ;
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 33









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     1510 INFILE
     1520     .BYTE $1C,$9C,"    File To Convert:",$00
     1530 ;
     1540 OUTFILE
     1550     .BYTE $1C,$9C,"    Output File:",$00
     1560 ;
     1570 DONE
     1580     .BYTE $9B,$9B,$7F,"DONE! - [RETURN] To Continue",$00 $
     1590 ;
     1600 ERR
     1610     .BYTE $7F,"ERROR - [RETURN] To Retry",$00
     1620 ;
     1630 EDIT
     1640     .BYTE "E:"
     1650 ;
     1660 INNAME
     1670     .BYTE "D:               "
     1680 ;
     1690 OUTNAME
     1700     .BYTE "D:               "
     1710 ;
     1720 ANSWER
     1730     .BYTE $00,$00
     1740 ;
     1750 FLAG
     1760     .BYTE $00,$00,$00
     1770 ;
     1780 TLEN
     1790     .BYTE $00
     1800 ;
     1810 ATRET
     1820     .BYTE $9B
     1830 ;
     1840 ASCRET
     1850     .BYTE $0D,$0A
     1860 ;
     1870 SAVLM
     1880     .BYTE $00
     1890 ;
     1900 ;Open Channel 1 To E:
     1910 ;
     1920 START
     1930     LDA LMARGN  ;SAVE ORIGINAL
     1940     STA SAVLM   ;LEFT MARGIN
     1950     LDA #$00
     1960     STA LMARGN
     1970 ;
     1980     LDX #$10    ;CHANNEL 1
     1990     LDA #$0C    ;CLOSE
     2000     STA ICCOM,X ;JUST IN CASE
     2010     JSR CIOV
     2020 ;
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 34









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     2030     LDX #$10    ;CHANNEL 1
     2040     LDA #$03    ;OPEN
     2050     STA ICCOM,X ;EDITOR
     2060     LDA # <EDIT
     2070     STA ICBAL,X
     2080     LDA # >EDIT
     2090     STA ICBAH,X
     2100     LDA #$0C    ;READ,WRITE
     2110     STA ICAX1,X
     2120     JSR CIOV    ;DO IT
     2130 ;
     2140 ;Print Text
     2150 ;
     2160 PRG
     2170     LDA # <TEXT ;HOLD ADDR OF
     2180     STA SAVLOC  ;TEXT FOR USE
     2190     LDA # >TEXT
     2200     STA SAVLOC+1
     2210     JSR PRNTIC1
     2220 ;
     2230 ;Get Answer
     2240 ;
     2250 GETNUM
     2260     LDA # <ANSWER ;HOLD ADDR OF
     2270     STA SAVLOC  ;ANSWER FOR USE
     2280     LDA # >ANSWER
     2290     STA SAVLOC+1
     2300     LDA #$02    ;ANSWER LENGTH
     2310     STA TLEN
     2320     JSR GETIC1
     2330 ;
     2340     LDA ANSWER  ;FIND OUT WHAT
     2350     CMP #$31    ;ANSWER WAS
     2360     BNE TRY2    ;NOT 1
     2370     LDA #$00    ;IT IS 1
     2380     STA FLAG    ;SET FLAG FOR
     2390     JMP CONVRT  ;ASCII - ATASCII
     2400     LDA #$40    ;SET UP CAPS
     2410     STA SHFLOK
     2420 ;
     2430 TRY2
     2440     CMP #$32
     2450     BNE TRYQ    ;NOT 2
     2460     LDA #$01    ;IT IS 2
     2470     STA FLAG    ;SET FLAG FOR
     2480     JMP CONVRT  ;ATASCII - ASCII
     2490 ;
     2500 TRYQ
     2510     CMP #$51
     2520     BNE TRYAGN  ;NOT Q
     2530     LDA SAVLM   ;RESTORE LEFT
     2540     STA LMARGN  ;MARGIN
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 35









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     2550     JMP (DOSVEC) ;BACK TO DOS
     2560 ;
     2570 TRYAGN
     2580     LDA # <QUSTN ;REPRINT JUST
     2590     STA SAVLOC  ;THE QUESTION
     2600     LDA # >QUSTN
     2610     STA SAVLOC+1
     2620     JSR PRNTIC1 ;PRINT IT
     2630     JMP GETNUM  ;TRY AGAIN
     2640 ;
     2650 ;Print Routine
     2660 ;
     2670 PRNTIC1
     2680     LDY #$00
     2690     LDA (SAVLOC),Y ;$00=TEXT END
     2700     CMP #$00    ;SAVLOC=ADDR OF
     2710     BEQ ENDPRNT ;TEXT
     2720     LDX #$10    ;CHANEL 1
     2730     LDA #$0B    ;PUT BINARY REC
     2740     STA ICCOM,X
     2750     LDA SAVLOC  ;TEXT ADDR
     2760     STA ICBAL,X
     2770     LDA SAVLOC+1
     2780     STA ICBAH,X
     2790     LDA #$01    ;1 CHAR ONLY
     2800     STA ICBLL,X
     2810     LDA #$00
     2820     STA ICBLH,X
     2830     JSR CIOV    ;DO IT
     2840     INC SAVLOC  ;NEXT CHAR
     2850     BNE PRNTIC1
     2860     INC SAVLOC+1
     2870     JMP PRNTIC1 ;DO IT AGAIN
     2880 ENDPRNT
     2890     RTS 
     2900 ;
     2910 ;Get Answer
     2920 ;
     2930 GETIC1
     2940     LDA #$00    ;SET NO INVERSE
     2950     STA INVFLG
     2960     LDX #$10    ;CHANNEL 1
     2970     LDA #$05    ;GET TEXT REC
     2980     STA ICCOM,X
     2990     LDA SAVLOC  ;BUFFER ADDR
     3000     STA ICBAL,X
     3010     LDA SAVLOC+1
     3020     STA ICBAH,X
     3030     LDA TLEN    ;GET LENGTH
     3040     STA ICBLL,X
     3050     LDA #$00
     3060     STA ICBLH,X
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 36









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     3070     JSR CIOV    ;DO IT
     3080     RTS 
     3090 ;
     3100 ;Get Filenames
     3110 ;
     3120 CONVRT
     3130     LDA # <RETURN ;HOLD ADDR OF
     3140     STA SAVLOC  ;TEXT FOR USE
     3150     LDA # >RETURN
     3160     STA SAVLOC+1
     3170     JSR PRNTIC1
     3180 ;
     3190 GETIN
     3200     LDA # <INFILE ;PRINT SOME
     3210     STA SAVLOC  ;MORE TEXT
     3220     LDA # >INFILE
     3230     STA SAVLOC+1
     3240     JSR PRNTIC1
     3250 ;
     3260     LDA #$00
     3270     TAX 
     3280 ;
     3290 CLRIN
     3300     STA INNAME+2,X
     3310     INX 
     3320     CPX #$0F
     3330     BNE CLRIN
     3340 ;
     3350     LDA # <INNAME+2 ;GET
     3360     STA SAVLOC  ;FILE TO CONVERT
     3370     LDA # >INNAME+2
     3380     STA SAVLOC+1
     3390     LDA #$0F    ;TEXT LENGTH
     3400     STA TLEN
     3410     JSR GETIC1
     3420 ;
     3430     LDA INNAME+3 ;FIND COLON
     3440     CMP #$3A
     3450     BNE TRYNXT
     3460     LDA #$00    ;FOUND IT, SET
     3470     STA FLAG+1  ;FLAG
     3480     JMP OPENIN
     3490 ;
     3500 TRYNXT
     3510     LDA INNAME+4 ;TRY AGAIN FOR
     3520     CMP #$3A    ;COLON
     3530     BNE NOTHERE
     3540     LDA #$00    ;FOUNT IT, SET
     3550     STA FLAG+1  ;FLAG
     3560     JMP OPENIN
     3570 ;
     3580 NOTHERE
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 37









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     3590     LDA #$01    ;IT'S NOT HERE
     3600     STA FLAG+1  ;SET FLAG
     3610 ;
     3620 OPENIN
     3630     LDX #$20    ;CHANNEL 2
     3640     LDA #$0C    ;CLOSE - JUST
     3650     STA ICCOM,X ;IN CASE
     3660     JSR CIOV
     3670 ;
     3680     LDX #$20    ;CHANNEL 2
     3690     LDA #$03    ;OPEN
     3700     STA ICCOM,X
     3710     LDA FLAG+1  ;CHECK FLAG
     3720     CMP #$00
     3730     BNE NOTSET
     3740     LDA # <INNAME+2 ;FILENAME
     3750     STA ICBAL,X ;ADDR
     3760     LDA # >INNAME+2
     3770     STA ICBAH,X
     3780     JMP CONT
     3790 ;
     3800 NOTSET
     3810     LDA # <INNAME ;FILENAME ADDR
     3820     STA ICBAL,X
     3830     LDA # >INNAME
     3840     STA ICBAH,X
     3850 ;
     3860 CONT
     3870     LDA #$04    ;READ FILE
     3880     STA ICAX1,X
     3890     JSR CIOV
     3900     BPL GETOUT  ;IT WORKED
     3910     JMP GETIN   ;FAILED - RETRY
     3920 ;
     3930 GETOUT
     3940     LDA # <RETURN ;HOLD ADDR OF
     3950     STA SAVLOC  ;TEXT FOR USE
     3960     LDA # >RETURN
     3970     STA SAVLOC+1
     3980     JSR PRNTIC1
     3990 ;
     4000 GETOUT1
     4010     LDA # <OUTFILE ;PRINT SOME
     4020     STA SAVLOC  ;MORE TEXT
     4030     LDA # >OUTFILE
     4040     STA SAVLOC+1
     4050     JSR PRNTIC1
     4060 ;
     4070     LDA #$00
     4080     TAX 
     4090 ;
     4100 CLROUT
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 38









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     4110     STA OUTNAME+2,X
     4120     INX 
     4130     CPX #$10
     4140     BNE CLROUT
     4150 ;
     4160     LDA # <OUTNAME+2 ;GET
     4170     STA SAVLOC  ;FILE TO CONVERT
     4180     LDA # >OUTNAME+2
     4190     STA SAVLOC+1
     4200     LDA #$0F    ;TEXT LENGTH
     4210     STA TLEN
     4220     JSR GETIC1
     4230 ;
     4240     LDA OUTNAME+3 ;FIND COLON
     4250     CMP #$3A
     4260     BNE TRYNXT1
     4270     LDA #$00    ;FOUND IT, SET
     4280     STA FLAG+2  ;FLAG
     4290     JMP OPENOUT
     4300 ;
     4310 TRYNXT1
     4320     LDA OUTNAME+4 ;TRY AGAIN FOR
     4330     CMP #$3A    ;COLON
     4340     BNE NOTHERE1
     4350     LDA #$00    ;FOUNT IT, SET
     4360     STA FLAG+2  ;FLAG
     4370     JMP OPENOUT
     4380 ;
     4390 NOTHERE1
     4400     LDA #$01    ;IT'S NOT HERE
     4410     STA FLAG+2  ;SET FLAG
     4420 ;
     4430 OPENOUT
     4440     LDX #$30    ;CHANNEL 3
     4450     LDA #$0C    ;CLOSE - JUST
     4460     STA ICCOM,X ;IN CASE
     4470     JSR CIOV
     4480 ;
     4490     LDX #$30    ;CHANNEL 2
     4500     LDA #$03    ;OPEN
     4510     STA ICCOM,X
     4520     LDA FLAG+2  ;CHECK FLAG
     4530     CMP #$00
     4540     BNE NOTSET1
     4550     LDA # <OUTNAME+2 ;FILENAME
     4560     STA ICBAL,X ;ADDR
     4570     LDA # >OUTNAME+2
     4580     STA ICBAH,X
     4590     JMP CONT1
     4600 ;
     4610 NOTSET1
     4620     LDA # <OUTNAME ;FILENAME
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 39









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     4630     STA ICBAL,X ;ADDR
     4640     LDA # >OUTNAME
     4650     STA ICBAH,X
     4660 ;
     4670 CONT1
     4680     LDA #$08    ;WRITE FILE
     4690     STA ICAX1,X
     4700     JSR CIOV
     4710     BPL DOIT
     4720     JMP GETOUT1
     4730 ;
     4740 ;Do Conversion
     4750 ;
     4760 DOIT
     4770     LDA FLAG    ;FIND OUT WHICH
     4780     CMP #$00    ;CONVERSION
     4790     BEQ ASCAT
     4800     JMP ATASC
     4810 ;
     4820 ASCAT
     4830     LDA # <ANSWER ;STORE ADDR
     4840     STA SAVLOC
     4850     LDA # >ANSWER
     4860     STA SAVLOC+1
     4870     JSR GETIC2
     4880     BPL GETCHAR
     4890     JMP END
     4900 ;
     4910 GETCHAR
     4920     LDA ANSWER  ;IS IT CTRL-M?
     4930     CMP #$0D
     4940     BEQ GOTIT   ;YES, REPLACE IT
     4950     LDA # <ANSWER ;NO, PUT CHAR
     4960     STA SAVLOC  ;BACK
     4970     LDA # >ANSWER
     4980     STA SAVLOC+1
     4990     LDA #$01
     5000     STA TLEN
     5010     JSR PUTIC3
     5020     BPL ASCAT
     5030     JMP ERROR
     5040 ;
     5050 GOTIT
     5060     LDA # <ANSWER ;YES, GET
     5070     STA SAVLOC  ;SECOND PART
     5080     LDA # >ANSWER
     5090     STA SAVLOC+1
     5100     JSR GETIC2
     5110 ;
     5120     LDA # <ATRET ;PUT ATASCII
     5130     STA SAVLOC  ;C/R TO OUTPUT
     5140     LDA # >ATRET
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 40









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     5150     STA SAVLOC+1
     5160     LDA #$01
     5170     STA TLEN
     5180     JSR PUTIC3
     5190     BPL ASCAT
     5200     JMP ERROR
     5210 ;
     5220 GETIC2
     5230     LDX #$20    ;CHANNEL #2
     5240     LDA #$07    ;GET BINARY REC
     5250     STA ICCOM,X
     5260     LDA SAVLOC  ;BUFFER ADDR
     5270     STA ICBAL,X
     5280     LDA SAVLOC+1
     5290     STA ICBAH,X
     5300     LDA #$01    ;LENGTH = 1
     5310     STA ICBLL,X
     5320     LDA #$00
     5330     STA ICBLH,X
     5340     JSR CIOV
     5350     RTS 
     5360 ;
     5370 PUTIC3
     5380     LDX #$30    ;CHANNEL #3
     5390     LDA #$0B    ;PUT BINARY REC
     5400     STA ICCOM,X
     5410     LDA SAVLOC  ;TEXT ADDR
     5420     STA ICBAL,X
     5430     LDA SAVLOC+1
     5440     STA ICBAH,X
     5450     LDA TLEN    ;TEXT LENGTH
     5460     STA ICBLL,X
     5470     LDA #$00
     5480     STA ICBLH,X
     5490     JSR CIOV
     5500     RTS 
     5510 ;
     5520 ATASC
     5530     LDA # <ANSWER ;STORE ADDR
     5540     STA SAVLOC
     5550     LDA # >ANSWER
     5560     STA SAVLOC+1
     5570     JSR GETIC2
     5580     BPL GETCHAR1
     5590     JMP END
     5600 ;
     5610 GETCHAR1
     5620     LDA ANSWER
     5630     CMP #$9B    ;IS IT C/R?
     5640     BEQ GOTIT1  ;YES, REPLACE IT
     5650     LDA # <ANSWER ;NO, PUT IT
     5660     STA SAVLOC  ;BACK
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 41









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     5670     LDA # >ANSWER
     5680     STA SAVLOC+1
     5690     LDA #$01
     5700     STA TLEN
     5710     JSR PUTIC3
     5720     BPL ATASC
     5730     JMP ERROR
     5740 ;
     5750 GOTIT1
     5760     LDA # <ASCRET ;PUT ASCII
     5770     STA SAVLOC  ;C/R,LF PAIR IN
     5780     LDA # >ASCRET
     5790     STA SAVLOC+1
     5800     LDA #$02
     5810     STA TLEN
     5820     JSR PUTIC3
     5830     BPL ATASC
     5840     JMP ERROR
     5850 ;
     5860 ;End Of Run
     5870 ;
     5880 END
     5890     LDX #$20    ;CHANNEL 2
     5900     LDA #$0C    ;CLOSE
     5910     STA ICCOM,X
     5920     JSR CIOV
     5930 ;
     5940     LDX #$30    ;CHANNEL 3
     5950     LDA #$0C    ;CLOSE
     5960     STA ICCOM,X
     5970     JSR CIOV
     5980 ;
     5990     LDA # <DONE ;LET USER KNOW
     6000     STA SAVLOC
     6010     LDA # >DONE
     6020     STA SAVLOC+1
     6030     JSR PRNTIC1
     6040 ;
     6050     LDA # <ANSWER ;GET C/R
     6060     STA SAVLOC
     6070     LDA # >ANSWER
     6080     STA SAVLOC+1
     6090     LDA #$02
     6100     STA TLEN
     6110     JSR GETIC1
     6120 ;
     6130     JMP PRG
     6140 ;
     6150 ERROR
     6160     LDX #$20    ;CHANNEL 2
     6170     LDA #$0C    ;CLOSE
     6180     STA ICCOM,X
     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 42









     OSS Newsletter                                               Fall 1986
     --------------                                               ---------
     
     6190     JSR CIOV
     6200 ;
     6210     LDA #$30    ;CHANNEL 3
     6220     LDA #$0C    ;CLOSE
     6230     STA ICCOM,X
     6240     JSR CIOV
     6250 ;
     6260     LDA # <ERR  ;THERE'S A PROB
     6270     STA SAVLOC
     6280     LDA # >ERR
     6290     STA SAVLOC+1
     6300     JSR PRNTIC1
     6310 ;
     6320     LDA # <ANSWER ;GET C/R
     6330     STA SAVLOC
     6340     LDA # >ANSWER
     6350     STA SAVLOC+1
     6360     LDA #$02
     6370     STA TLEN
     6380     JSR GETIC1
     6390 ;
     6400     JMP PRG
     6410 ;
     6420 ;End Of Program
     6430 ;
     6440     *=  $02E0
     6450     .WORD BEGIN
     6460 ;
     6470     .END 
     






















     
     Volume 1, Issue 1                                              Page 43









